The following is a conversation with Andrew Huberman, a neuroscientist at Stanford,
working to understand how the brain works, how it can change their experience,
and how to repair brain circuits damaged by injury or disease.
He has a great Instagram account at Huberman Lab, where he teaches the world about the brain
and the human mind. Also, he's a friend and an inspiration in that he shows that you can be
humble, giving, and still succeed in the science world. Quick mention of each sponsor,
followed by some thoughts related to the episode. AID Sleep, a mattress that cools itself and gives
me yet another reason to enjoy sleep. SEM Rush, the most advanced SEO optimization tool I've
ever come across, and Cache App, the app I use to send money to friends. Please check out these
sponsors in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. As a side note,
let me say that I heard from a lot of people about the previous conversation I had with
Yaron Brooke about Objectivism. Some people loved it, some people hated it. I misspoke in some parts,
was more critical on occasion than I meant to be, didn't push on certain points that I should have,
was undereducated or completely unaware about some major things that happened in the past,
or major ideas out there. I bring all that up to say that if we are to have difficult conversations,
we have to give each other space to make mistakes, to learn, to grow. Taking one or two statements
from a three hour podcast and suggesting that they encapsulate who I am, I was, or ever will be,
is a standard that we can't hold each other to. I don't think anyone could live up to that kind
of standard, at least I know I can't. The conversation with Yaron is mild, relative to some conversations
that I will likely have in the coming year. Please continue to challenge me, but please try to do so
with love and with patience. I promise to work my ass off to improve. Whether I'm successful at that
or not, we shall see. If you enjoy this thing, subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars
on Apple Podcasts, follow on Spotify, support on Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter at Lex
Friedman. And now, here's my conversation with Andrew Huberman. You've mentioned that in your
lab at Stanford, you do stress by putting people into virtual reality and having them go through
one of a set of experiences. I think you mentioned this on Rogan or with Whitney,
that scare them. So just on a practical, psychological level and maybe on a philosophical
level, what are people afraid of? What are the fears? What are these fear experiences that
you find to be effective? Yeah, so it depends on the person, obviously. And we should probably
define fear, right? Because you can, without going too far down the rabbit hole of defining
these things, you can't really have fear without stress, but you could have stress without fear.
And you can't really have trauma without fear and stress, but you could have fear and stress
without trauma. So we can start playing the word game, and that actually is one of the
motivations for even having a laboratory that studies these things is that we really need better
physiological, neuroscientific, and operational definitions of what these things are. I mean,
the field of understanding emotions and states, which is mainly what I'm interested in,
is very complicated. But we can do away with a lot of complicated debate and say,
in our laboratory, what we're looking for to assign it a value of fear is a big inflection
in autonomic arousal. So increases in heart rate, increases in breathing,
perspiration, pupil dilation, all the hallmark signature features of the stress response.
And in some cases, we have the benefit of getting neurosurgery patients where we've got
electrodes in their amygdala and their insula and the orbital frontal cortex down beneath the skull.
So these are chronically implanted electrodes, we're getting multiunit signals. And we can start
seeing some central features of meaning within the brain. And what's interesting is that
as trivial as it might seem in listening to it, almost everybody responds to heights and falling
from a high virtual place with a very strong stress, if not fear response. And that's because
the visual vestibular apparatus, the optic flow and how it links to the balanced semicircular
canals in the inner ears, all this technical stuff. But really, all of that pulls all your
physiology, the feeling that your stomach is dropping, the feeling that suddenly you're
sweating even though you're not afraid of falling off this virtual platform, but you feel as if
you're falling because of the optic flow, that one is universal. So we've got a dive with Great
White Sharks experience where you actually exit the cage. We went out into this in the real world
and brought back 360 video that's built out pretty. Oh, so this is actually 360 video?
360 video. And this was important to us, right? So when we decided to set up this platform,
a lot of the motivation was that a lot of the studies of these things in laboratories, I don't
want to call them lame because I want to be respectful of the people that did this stuff
before, but they'd study fear by showing subjects a picture of a bloody arm or a snake or something
like that. And it just, unless you have a snake phobia, it just wasn't creating a real enough
experience. So we need to do something where people aren't going to get injured, but where we
can tap into the physiology and that thing of presence of people momentarily, not the whole
time, but momentarily forgetting they're in a laboratory. And so heights will always do it.
And I, if people want to challenge me on this, I like to point to that movie Free Solo,
which was wild because, you know, it's incredible movie, but I think a lot of its popularity can
be explained by a puzzle, which is you knew he was going to live when you walked in the theater
or you watched it at home. You knew before that he survived. And yet it was still scary
that people somehow were able to put themselves into that experience or into Alex's experience
enough that they, they were concerned or worried or afraid at some level. So heights always does it.
If we get people who have generalized anxiety, these are people who
wake up and move through life at a generally higher state of autonomic arousal and anxiety,
then we can tip them a little bit more easily with things that don't necessarily get everyone afraid,
things like claustrophobia, public speaking, that's going to vary from person to person.
And then if you're afraid of sharks, like my sister, for instance, afraid of sharks,
she won't even come to my laboratory because there's, there's a thing about sharks in it.
That's how terrified some people are of these specific stimuli, but heights get some every time.
And I'm terrified of heights. It's, you know, when we have you step off a platform,
virtual platform, and it's a flat floor in my lab, but we, you're up there.
Well, you actually allow them the possibility in the virtual world to actually take the leap
of faith. Yeah, maybe I should describe a little bit of the experiment. So without giving away too
much in case someone wants to be a subject in one of these experiments, we have them playing
a cognitive game. It's a simple lights out kind of game where you're pointing a cursor and turning
out lights on a grid, but it gets increasingly complex and it speeds up on them. And, you know,
there's a failure point for everybody where they just can't make the motor commands fast enough.
And then we surprise people essentially by placing them virtually all of a sudden,
they're just, they're on a narrow platform between two buildings. And then we encourage them or we
cue them with a, with talking to them through a microphone to continue across that platform to
continue the game. And, you know, some people, they just won't, they actually will hold, get down
on the ground and hold on to a virtual beam that doesn't even exist on a flat floor. And so what
this really tells us is the power of the brain to enter these virtual states as if they were real.
And we really think that anchoring the visual and the vestibular, the balance
components of the nervous system are what bring people into that presence so quickly. There's
also the potential and we haven't done this yet to bring in 360 sound. So the reason we did 360
video is that when we started all this back in 2016, a lot of the VR was pretty lame, frankly,
it was CGI. It just wasn't real enough. But with 360 video, we knew that we could get people into
this presence where they think they're in a real experience more quickly. And our friend,
Michael Muller, who I was introduced to because of the project I reached out to some friends,
Michael Muller is a very famous portrait photographer in Hollywood, but he dives with
great white sharks and he leaves the cage. And so we worked with him to build a 360 video apparatus
that we could swim underwater with, went out to Guadalupe Island, Mexico, and actually got the
experience. It was a lot of fun. There were some interesting moments out there of danger,
but it came back with that video and built that for the sharks. And then we realized,
we need to do this for everything. We need to do it for heights. We need to do it for public
speaking, for claustrophobia. And what's missing still is 360 sound, where 360 sound would be,
for instance, if I were to turn around and there was a giant attack dog there,
the moment I would turn around and see it, the dog would growl. But if I turn back toward you,
then it would be silent. And that brings a very real element to one's own behavior,
where you don't know what's going to happen if you turn a corner. Whereas if there's a dog growling
behind me and I turn around and then I turn back to you and it's still growling, that might seem
like more of an impending threat and sustained threat. But actually, it's when you start linking
your own body movements to the experience. So when it's closed loop, where my movements and choices
are starting to influence things and they're getting scarier and scarier, that's when you can
really drive people's nervous system down these paths of high states of stress and fear. Now,
we don't want to traumatize people, obviously, but we also study a number of tools that allow
them to calm themselves in these environments. So the short answer is height.
Height? Yeah. Well, from a psychology and from a neuroscience perspective,
this whole construction that you've developed is fascinating. We did this a little bit with
autonomous vehicles. So to try to understand the decision making process of a pedestrian when they
cross the road and trying to create an experience of a car that can run you over. So there's the
danger there. I was so surprised how real that whole world was. And the graphics that we built
wasn't ultra realistic or anything, but I was still afraid of being hit by a car. Everybody we
tested were really afraid of being hit by that car. Even though it was all a simulation. It was
all a simulation. It was kind of a boxy, actually. I mean, it wasn't like ultra realistic simulation.
It's fascinating. Looms and heights. So any kind of depth, we're just programmed to not necessarily
recoil, but to be cautious about that edge and that depth. And then looms, things coming at us
that are getting larger. There are looming sensing neurons even in the retina at a very,
very early stage of visual processing. And incidentally, the way Mueller and folks learned
how to not get eaten by great white sharks when you're swimming outside the cage is as they start
lumbering in, you swim toward them. And they get very confused when you loom on them because
clearly you're smaller. Clearly they could eat you if they wanted to. But there's something about
forward movement toward any creature that that creature questions whether or not it would be a
good idea to generate forward movement toward you. And so that's actually the survival tool of these
cage exit white shark divers. Are you playing around with like one of the critical things for
the autonomous vehicle research is you couldn't do 360 video because there's a game theoretic.
There's an interactive element that's really necessary. So maybe people realize this. Maybe
they don't. But 360 video, you obviously, well, it's actually not that obvious to people, but you
can't change the reality that you're watching. That's right. But you find that that's like,
is there something fundamental about fear and stress that the interactive element is essential for?
Or do you find you can you can arouse people with just the video? Great question. It works best to
use mixed reality. So we have a snake stimulus. I personally don't like snakes at all. I don't
mind spiders. We also have a spider stimulus. But like snakes, I just don't like them. There's
something about the the slithering and the it just creates a visceral response for me.
Some people not so much. And they have lower levels of stress and fear in there. But one way
that we can get them to feel more of that is to use mixed reality, where we have an actual physical
bat, and they have to stomp out the snake as opposed to just walk to a little safe corner,
which then makes the snake disappear. That tends to be not as stressful as if they have a physical
weapon. And so you've got people in there, you know, banging on the floor against this thing.
And there's something about engaging that makes it more of a more of a threat. Now,
I should also mention we we always get the subjective report from the subject of what
they experienced because I we never want to project our own ideas about what they were feeling.
But that's the beauty of working with humans is you can ask them how they feel.
Exactly. And humans aren't great at explaining how they feel. But it's a lot easier to understand
what they're saying than a mouse or a macaque monkey is saying. So it's the best we can do
is language plus these physiological and neurophysiological signals.
Is there something you've learned about yourself about your deepest fears?
Like you said snakes, is there something that like if I were to torture you,
I'm so I'm Russian. So, you know, I always kind of think, how can I murder this people that this
person entered the room? But also, how can I torture you to get some information out of you?
What would I go with? It's interesting, you should say that I never considered myself claustrophobic.
But because I don't mind small environments provided they're well ventilated. But before
COVID, I started going to this Russian Banya, you know, and then we jumped here. And I had never
been to a Banya. So, you know, the whole experience of really, really hot sauna. And what are they
called the plots? They're hitting you with the leaves. And it gets really hot and humid in there.
And there were a couple of times where I thought, okay, this thing is below ground.
It's in a city where there are a lot of earthquakes. Like if this place crumbled and we were stuck in
here, and I'd start getting a little panicky, and I realized I'm like, I don't like small confined
spaces with poor ventilation. So I realized I think I have some claustrophobia. And I wasn't
aware of that before. So I put myself into our own claustrophobia stimulus, which involves getting
into an elevator. And with a bunch of people, virtual people, and the elevator gets stalled.
And at first, you're fine, you feel fine. But then as we start modulating the environment,
and we actually can control levels of oxygen in the environment if we want to,
it is really uncomfortable for me. And I never would have thought, you know, I fly,
I'm comfortable in planes, but it is really uncomfortable. And so I think I've unhatched
a bit of a claustrophobia. Yeah. Yeah, for me as well, probably. That one, that one's pretty bad.
The heights, I tried to overcome. So I went to skydiving to try to overcome the fear of heights,
but that didn't help. Did you jump out? Yeah, jump out. But it was, it was a,
it was fundamentally different experience. And I guess there could be a lot of different
flavors of fear of heights, maybe. But the one I have didn't seem to be connected to jumping
out of a plane. It's a very different, because like once you accept that you're going to jump,
then it's, it's a different thing. I think what I'm afraid of is the moments before it
is the scariest part. Absolutely. And I don't think that's emphasized in the skydiving experience
as much. And also just the acceptance of the fact that it's going to happen. So once you accept it
is going to happen, it's not as scary. It's the fact that it's not supposed to happen. And it might,
that's the scary part. I guess I'm not being eloquent in this description, but there's something
about skydiving that was actually philosophically liberating. I was, I was like, wow, it, it was
the possibility that you can walk on a surface. And then at a certain point, there's no surface
anymore to walk on. And it's all of a sudden the world becomes three dimensional. And there's this
freedom of floating that the concept of like, of earth disappears for a brief few seconds. I don't
know. That was, that was wild. That was wild, but I'm still terrified of heights. So I mean, one,
one thing I want to ask just on fear, because it's so fascinating is, have you
learned anything about what it takes to overcome fears? Yes. And that comes from two, from a,
you know, research study standpoint, two parallel tracks of research. One was done actually in mice,
because we have a mouse lab also where we can probe around in different brain areas and try
and figure out what interesting brain areas we might want to probe around in humans. And
a graduate student in my lab, she's now at Caltech, Lindsey Salay, published a paper back
in 2018 showing that what at first might seem a little bit obvious, but the mechanisms are not,
which is that there are really three responses to fear. You can pause, you can freeze essentially.
You can retreat, you can back up, or you can go forward. And there's a single hub of neurons
in the midbrain, in the, just actually not the midbrain, but it's in the middle of the thalamus,
which is a forebrain structure. And depending on which neurons are active there, there's a much
higher probability that a mouse or it turns out or a human will advance in the face of fear,
or will pause or will retreat. Now, that just assigns a neural structure to a behavioral phenomenon.
But what's interesting is that it turns out that the lowest level of stress or autonomic arousal
is actually associated with the pausing and freezing response. Then as the threat becomes
more impending, and we used visual looms in this case, the retreat response has a slightly higher
level of autonomic arousal and stress. So think about playing hide and go, seeking or trying to
stay quiet in a closet that you're hiding. If you're very calm, it's easy to stay quiet and
still. As your level of stress goes up, it's harder to maintain that level of quiet and stillness.
You see this also in animals that are stalking, a cat will chatter its teeth. That's actually
sort of top down inhibition and trying to restrain behavior. So the freeze response
is actually an active response, but it's fairly low stress. And what was interesting to us is that
the highest level of autonomic arousal was associated with the forward movement toward
the threat. So in your case, jumping out of the plane. However, the forward movement in the face
of threat was linked to the activation of what we call collateral, which means just a side
connection, literally a wire in the brain that connects to the dopamine circuits for reward.
And so when one safely and adaptively, meaning you survive, moves through a threat or toward a
threat, it's rewarded as a positive experience. And so the key, it actually maps very well the
cognitive behavioral therapy and a lot of the existing treatments for trauma is that you have
to confront the thing that makes you afraid. So otherwise, you exist in this very low level of
reverbitory circuit activity where the circuits for autonomic arousal are humming and they're
humming more and more and more. And we have to remember that stress and fear and threat were
designed to agitate us so that we actually move. So the reason I mention this is I think a lot
of times people think that the maximum stress response or fear response is to freeze and to
lock up. But that's actually not the maximum stress response. The maximum stress response is to
advance, but it's associated with reward. It has positive valence. So there's this kind of,
everyone always thinks about the bell shape curve for at low levels of rousal performance is low.
And as the increases performance goes higher, and then it drops off as you get really stressed.
But there's another bump further out that's distribution where you perform very well under
very high levels of stress. And so we've been spending a lot of time in humans and in animals
exploring what it takes to get people comfortable to go to that place. And also to let them experience
how there are heightened states of cognition there. There's changes in time perception that
allow you to evaluate your environment at a faster frame rate, essentially. This is the
matrix as a lot of people think of it. But we tend to think about fear as all the low level
stuff where things aren't worked out. But there are many, there are a lot of different features
to the fear response. And so we think about it quantitatively and we think about it from a circuit
perspective in terms of outcomes. And we try and weigh that against the threat. So we never want
people to put themselves in unnecessary risk. But that's where the VR is fun, because you can push
people hard without risk of physically injuring them. And that's a, like you said, the little
bump that that seems to be a very small fraction of the human experience, right? So it's kind of
fascinating to study it. Because most of us move through life without ever experiencing that kind
of focus. Well, everything's in a peak state there. I really think that's where optimal
performance lies. There's so many interesting words here. But what's performance? And what's
optimal performance? We're talking about mental ability to what, to perceive the environment
quickly, to make actions quickly. What's optimal performance? Yeah, well, it's very subjective
and it varies depending on task and environment. So one way we can make it a little bit more
operational and concrete is to say, there is a sweet spot, if you will, where the level of
internal autonomic arousal, aka stress or alertness, whatever you want to call it, is ideally matched
to the speed of whatever challenge you have to be facing in the outside world. So we all have
perception of the outside world as exteroception and the perception of our internal real estate
interoception. And when those two think when interoception and exteroception are matched
along a couple dimensions, performance tends to increase or tends to be in an optimal range.
So for instance, if you're, I don't play guitar, but I know you play guitar. So let's say you're
trying to learn something new on the guitar. I'm not saying that being in these super high
states of activation are the best place for you to be in order to learn. It may be that your internal
arousal needs to be at a level where your analysis of space and time has to be well matched to the
information coming in and what you're trying to do in terms of performance, in terms of playing
chords and notes and so forth. Now, in these cases of high threat where things are coming in quickly
and animals and humans need to react very quickly, the higher your state of autonomic arousal, the
better because you're slicing time more finely just because of the way the autonomic system works,
the pupil dilation, for instance, and movement of the lens essentially changes your optics.
That's obvious. But with the change in optics is a change in how you bend time and slice time,
which allows you to get more frames per second readout. With the guitar learning, for instance,
it might actually be that you want to be almost sleepy, almost in a kind of drowsy state to be
able to, and I don't play music, so I'm guessing here, but sense some of the nuance in the chords
or the ways that you're to be relaxed enough that your fingers can follow an external cue. So
matching the movement of your fingers to something that's pure extra reception. And so there is no
perfect autonomic state for performance. This is why I don't favor terms like flow because
they're not well operationally defined enough. But I do believe that optimal or peak performance
is going to arise when internal state is ideally matched to the space time features of the external
demands. So there's some slicing of time that happens, and then you're able to adjust a slice
time more finely or more or less finely in order to adjust to the stimulus, the dynamics of the
stimulus. What about the the realm of ideas? So like, you know, I'm a big believer, this guy named
Cal Newport who wrote a book about deep work. Yeah, I love that book. Yeah, he's great. I mean,
one of the nice things, I've always practiced deep work, but it's always nice to have words
put to the concepts that you've practiced. It somehow makes them more concrete and allows
you to get better. It turns it into a skill that you can get better at. But, you know, I also value
deep thinking, where you think it's almost meditative, you think about a particular concept
for long periods of time, the programming you have to do that kind of thing for, you just have to
hold this concept, like, like you hold it, and then you take steps with it, you take further
steps, and you're holding relatively complicated things in your mind as you're thinking about them.
And there's a lot of, I mean, the hardest part is there's a frustrating things like you take a step,
but it turns out to be the wrong direction. So you have to calmly turn around and take a step back,
and then it's you kind of like exploring through the space of ideas. Is there something about
your study of optimal performance that could be applied to the act of thinking,
as opposed to action? Well, we haven't done too much work there, but I think I can comment on it
from a neuroscience perspective, which is really all I do is, well, we do experiments in the lab,
but looking at things through the lens of neuroscience. So what you're describing can be
mapped fairly well to working memory, just keeping things online and updating them as they change
in information that's coming back into your brain. Jack Feldman, who I'm a huge fan of and
fortunate to be friends with, is a professor at UCLA, works on respiration and breathing,
but he has a physics background. And so he thinks about respiration and breathing in terms of
ground states and how they modulate other states, very, very interesting and I think,
important work. Jack has an answer to your question. So I'm not going to get this exactly
right because this is lifted from a coffee conversation that we had about a month ago.
So apologies in advance, but I think I can get it mostly right. So we were talking about this,
about how the brain updates cognitive states depending on demands and thinking in particular.
And he used an interesting example, I'd be curious to know if you agree or disagree.
He said, most great mathematics is done by people in their late teens and 20s, even you
could say early 20s, sometimes into the late 20s, but not much further on. Maybe I just
insulted some mathematicians. No, that's true. And I think that it demands, his argument was
there's a tremendous demand on working memory to work out theorems in math and to keep a number
of plates spinning, so to speak, mentally and run back and forth between them, updating them.
In physics, Jack said, and I think this makes sense to me too, that there's
a reliance on working memory, but an increased reliance on some sort of deep memory and deep
memory stores, probably stuff that's moved out of the hippocampus and forebraining into the cortex
and is more some episodic and declarative stuff. But really, so you're pulling from your library,
basically, it's not all RAM, it's not all working memory. And then in biology,
and physicists tend to have very active careers into their 30s and 40s and 50s and so forth,
sometimes later. And then in biology, you see careers that have a much longer arc,
kind of these protracted careers often, people still in their 60s and 70s doing really terrific work.
Not always doing it with their own hands because people in the labs are doing them, of course,
but and that work does tend to rely on insights gained from having a very deep knowledge base
where you can remember a paper or maybe a figure in a paper, you could go look it up if you wanted
to, but it's very different than the working memory of the mathematician. And so when you're
talking about coding or being in that tunnel of thought and trying to iterate and keeping a lot
of plate spinning, it speaks directly to working memory. My lab hasn't done too much of that.
Working memory. But we are pushing working memory when we have people do things like
these simple lights out tasks while they're under, we can increase the cognitive load
by increasing the level of autonomic arousal to the point where they start doing less well.
And, you know, everyone has a cliff. This is what's kind of fun. We've had, you know,
seal team operators come to the lab, we have people from other units in the military, very,
you know, we've had a range of of intellects and backgrounds and all sorts of things and
everyone has a cliff. And those cliffs sometimes show up as a function of the demands of speed
of processing or how many things you need to keep online. I mean, we're all limited at some
point in the number of things we can keep online. So what you're describing is very interesting
because it I think it has to do with how narrow or broad the information set is because and I don't
program I'm not an active programmer. So this is a regime I don't really fully know. So I don't
want to comment about it in that in any way that, you know, doesn't suggest that. But I think that
what you're talking about is top down control. So this is prefrontal cortex, keeping every bit
of reflexive circuitry at bay, the one that makes you want to get up and use the restroom,
the one that makes you want to check your phone, all of that, but also running these
anterior thalamus to prefrontal cortex loops, which we know are very important for working
memory. Yeah, let me try to think through this a little bit. So reducing the process of thinking
to working memory access is tricky. He's probably ultimately correct. But if I were to say some
of the most challenging things that an engineer has to do, and a scientific thinker, I would say
it's kind of depressing to think that we do that best in our 20s. But is this kind of first
principles thinking step of saying you you're accessing the things that you know, and then
saying, Well, let me how do I do this differently than I've done it before this this weird like
stepping back like, is this right? Let's try it this other way that that's the most
mentally taxing step is like, you've gotten quite good at this particular pattern of how you solve
this particular problem. So there's a there's a pattern recognition first, you're like, Okay,
I know how to build a thing that solves this particular problem in programming, say,
and then the question is, but can I do it much better? And I don't know if that's
I don't know what the hell that is. I don't know if that's accessing working memory.
That's that's almost access. Maybe it is accessing memory in a sense is trying to find
similar patterns in a totally different place that could be projected onto this.
But you're you're it's you're not querying facts, you're querying, like, functional things, like,
yes, patterns, I mean, you're running out, you're testing algorithms. Yeah, right,
you're testing algorithms. So I want to just because I know some of the people listening
to this and you how have basis in, you know, scientific training and have scientific training.
So I want to be clear, I think we can be correct about some things like the role of working memory
in these kinds of processes without being exhaustive. We're not saying they're the only thing
we're not, you know, we can be correct, but not assume that that's the only thing involved.
Right. And I mean, neuroscience, let's face it is still in its infancy. I mean, we probably
know 1% of what there is to know about the brain. You know, we've learned so much. And yet,
there may be global states that underlie this that make prefrontal circuitry work differently
than it would in a in a different regime, or even time of day. I mean, there's a lot of mysteries
about this. But so I just want to make sure that we sort of are we're aiming for precision
inaccuracy, but we're not going to be exhaustive. So there's a difference there. And I think,
you know, sometimes in the vastness of the internet, that gets forgotten.
So the other is that, you know, we think about, you know, we think about these operations at,
you know, really focused keeping a lot of things online. But what you were describing is actually
it, it speaks to the very real possibility probably that with certainty, there's another
element to all this, which is when you're trying out lots of things, in particular,
lots of different algorithms, you don't want to be in a in a state of very high autonomic
arousal. That's not what you want, because the higher level of autonomic arousal and stress in
the system, the more rigidly you're going to analyze space and time. Right. And what you're
talking about is playing with space time dimensionality. And I want to be very clear. I mean,
I'm the son of a physicist. I am not a physicist. When I talk about space and time, I'm literally
talking about visual space and how long it takes for my finger to move from this point to this point.
You are facing a tiger and trying to figure out how to avoid being eaten by the tiger.
And that's primarily going to be determined by the visual system in humans. We don't walk
through space, for instance, like a sent hound would and look at three dimensional sent plumes.
You know, when a sent hound goes out in the environment, they have depth to their odor
trip, the odor trails they're following. And they don't think about them. We don't think about odor
trails. You might say, Oh, well, the smell is getting more intense. Aha. But they actually
have three dimensional odor trails. So they see a cone of odor, see, of course, with their nose,
with their olfactory cortex. We do that with our visual system. And we parse time often
subconsciously, mainly with our visual system, also with our auditory system. And this shows up
for the musicians out there, metronomes are a great way to play with this, you know, base
drumming, when the frequency of base drumming changes, your perception of time changes quite
a lot. So in any event, space and time are linked in that through the sensory apparatus,
through the eyes and ears and nose, and probably through taste to and through touch
for us, but mainly through vision. So when you drop into some coding or iterating through a
creative process or trying to solve something hard, you can't really do that well if you're in a rigid
high level of autonomic arousal, because you're plugging in algorithms that are
in this space regime, this time regime matches at space time matched, whereas creativity,
I always think the lava lamp is actually a pretty good example, even though it has these
counterculture, new agey connotations, because you actually don't know which
direction things are going to change. And so in drowsy states, sleeping and drowsy states,
space and time become dislodged from one another somewhat, and they're very fluid. And I think
that's why a lot of solutions come to people after sleep and naps. And this could even take us into
a discussion, if you like, about psychedelics. And what we now know, for instance, that people
thought that psychedelics work by just creating spontaneous bursting of neurons and hallucinations,
but that the 5H2C and 2A receptors, which are the main sites for things like LSD and
psilocybin and some of the other ones that create hallucinations, the drugs that create hallucinations,
the most of those receptors are actually in the collection of neurons that encase the thalamus,
which is where all the sensory information goes into, a structure called the thalamic
reticular nucleus. And it's an inhibitory structure that makes sure that when we're
sitting here talking, that I'm mainly focused on whatever I'm seeing visually, that I'm
essentially eliminating a lot of sensory information under conditions where people take
psychedelics and these particular serotonin receptors are activated, that inhibitory shell,
it's literally shaped like a shell, starts losing its ability to inhibit the passage of
sensory information. But mostly, the effects of psychedelics are because the lateral connectivity
in layer five of cortex across cortical areas is increased. And what that does is that means
that the spacetime relationship for vision, like moving my finger from here to here, a very rigid
spacetime relationship, if I slow it down, it's slower, obviously, but there's a prediction
that can be made based on the neurons in the retina and the cortex. On psychedelics, this
could be very strange experience. But the auditory system has one that's slightly different
spacetime and they're matched to one another in deeper circuits in the brain. The olfactory
system has a different spacetime relationship to it. So under conditions of these
increased activation of these serotonin receptors, spacetime across sensory area starts
being fluid. So I'm no longer running the algorithm from moving my finger from here to here and
making a prediction based on vision alone. I'm now, this is where people talk about hearing
sites, right? You start linking, this might actually make a sound in a psychedelic state.
Now, I'm not suggesting people run out and do psychedelics because it's very disorganized.
But essentially what you're doing is you're mixing the algorithms. And so when you talk about being
able to access new solutions, you don't need to rely on psychedelics. If people choose to do that,
that's their business. But in drowsy states, this lateral connectivity is increased as well.
The shell of the thalamus shuts down. And what's happening is you're getting whole
brain activation at a level that you start mixing algorithms. And so sometimes I think
solutions come not from being in that narrow tunnel of spacetime and strong activation of
working memory and trying to iterate if this, then that's very strong, deductive and inductive
thinking and working from first principles, but also from states where something that was
an algorithm that you never had in existence before suddenly gets lumped with another algorithm.
And all of a sudden, a new possibility comes to mind. And so space and time need to be fluid and
space and time need to be rigid in order to come up with something meaningful. And I realize I'm
riffing long on this. But this is why I think there was so much interest a few years ago with
Michael Pollan's book and other things happening about psychedelics as a pathway to exploration
and all this kind of thing. But the real question is what you export back from those experiences.
Because dreams are amazing. But if you can't bring anything back from them, they're just amazing.
I wonder how to experiment with a mind without any medical assistance first.
I pushed my mind in all kinds of directions. I definitely want to, I did shrooms a couple of
times. I definitely want to figure out how I can experiment with psychedelics. I'm talking to Rick
Dobin, I think. Doblin. Doblin. Soon. I went back and forth. So he does all these studies on
psychedelics. And he keeps ignoring the parts of my email that asks, like, how do I participate in
these studies? There are some legality issues. I mean, conversation, I want to be very clear.
I'm not saying that anyone should run out and do psychedelics. I think that drowsy states and
sleep states are super interesting for accessing some of these more creative states of mind.
Hypnosis is something that my colleague David Spiegel, Associate Chair of Psychiatry at Stanford,
works on. Where also, again, it's a unique state because you have narrow context. So this is very
kind of tunnel vision and yet deeply relaxed where new algorithms, if you will, can start to surface.
Strong state for inducing neuroplasticity. And I think, so if I had a, I'm part of a group
that it's called the liminal collective as a group of people that get together and talk about
just wild ideas, but they try and implement. And it's a really interesting group, some people from
military, from Logitech and some other backgrounds, academic backgrounds. And I was asked, what would
be if you could create a tool, if you just had a tool like your magic wand wish for the day,
what would it be? I thought it'd be really interesting if someone could develop psychedelics
that have on off switches. So you could go into a psychedelic state very deeply for 10 minutes,
but you could launch yourself out of that state and place yourself into a linear real world state
very quickly so that you could extract whatever it was that happened in that experience and then go
back in if you wanted. Because the problem with psychedelic states and dream states is that,
first of all, a lot of the reason people do them is they're lying. They say they want plasticity
and they want all this stuff. They want a peak experience inside of an amplified experience.
So they're kind of seeking something unusual. I think we should just be honest about that
because a lot of times they're not trying to make their brain better. They're just trying to
experience something really amazing. But the problem is space and time are so unlocked
in these states, just like they are in dreams, that you can really end up with a whole lot of
nothing. You can have an amazing amplified experience housed in an amplified experience
and come out of that thinking you had a meaningful experience when you didn't bring anything back.
You didn't bring anything back. All you have is a fuzzy memory of having a transformational
experience. But you don't actually have tools to bring back or actually concrete ideas to bring
back. Yeah, it's interesting. I wonder if it's possible to do that with the mind to be able to
hop back and forth. I think that's where the real power of adjusting states is going to be.
It probably will be with devices. I mean, maybe it'll be done through pharmacology. It's just that
it's hard to do on off switches in human pharmacology, that we have them for animals.
I mean, we have Cree flip recombinases and we have channelopsins and haloridopsins and
all these kinds of things. But to do that work in humans is tricky. But I think you could do it
with virtual reality, augmented reality, and other devices that bring more of the somatic
experience into it. You're, of course, a scientist who's studying humans as a collective. I tend to
be just a one person scientist of just looking at myself. When these deep thinking, deep work
sessions, I'm very cognizant in the morning that there's times when my mind is so
eloquent at being able to jump around for ideas and hold them all together. I'm almost like,
I step back from a third person perspective and enjoy that whatever that mind is doing. I do not
waste those moments. I'm very conscious of this little creature that woke up that's only awake
for, if we're being honest, maybe a couple hours a day. Early part of the day for you. Early part
of the day. Not always. Early part of the day for me is a very fluid concept. You're one of those.
Yeah, you're one of those. Being single, one of the problems. Single and no meetings. I don't
schedule any meetings. I've been living on like a 28 hour day. So I like, it drifts. So it's all
over the place. But after a traditionally defined full night's sleep, whatever the heck that means,
I find that like in those moments, there's a clarity of mind that's just,
everything is effortless. And it's the deepest dives intellectually that I make. And I'm cognizant
of it. And I try to bring that to the other parts of the day that don't have it and treasure them
even more in those moments, because they only last like five or 10 minutes. Because of course,
in those moments, you want to do all kinds of stupid stuff that are completely is worthless,
like Czech social media or something like that. But those are the most precious things in intellectual
life is those mental moments of clarity. And I wonder, I'm learning how to control them.
I think caffeine is somehow involved. I'm not sure exactly.
Sure. Well, because if you learn how to titrate caffeine,
everyone's slightly different with this, what they need. But if you learn to titrate caffeine with
time of day and the kind of work that you're trying to do, you can bring that autonomic
arousal state into the close to perfect place. And then you can tune it in with,
you know, sometimes people want a little bit of background music, sometimes they want less,
these kinds of things. The early part of the day is interesting because the one thing that's not
often discussed is this transition out of sleep. So there's a book, I think it's called Winston
Churchill's nap. And it's about naps and the transition between wake and sleep as a valuable
period. I've a long time ago, someone who I respect a lot was mentoring me said,
be very careful about bringing in someone else's sensory experience early in the day.
So when I wake up, I'm very drowsy. I sleep well, but I don't emerge from that very quickly. I need
a lot of caffeine to wake up and whatnot. But there's this concept of getting the download from
sleep, which is, you know, in sleep, you were essentially expunging the things that you don't
need, the stuff that was meaningless from the previous day. But you were also running variations
on these algorithms of whatever it is you're trying to work out in life on short timescales,
like the previous day and long timescales, like your whole life. And those lateral connections
in layer five of the neocortex are very robustly active and cross sensory areas. And you're running
an algorithm or a brain, it's a brain state that will be useless in waking. You wouldn't get anything
done. You'd be the person talking to yourself in the hallway or something about something that
no one else can see. But in those states, you do that the theory is that you arrive at certain
solutions. And those solutions will reveal themselves in the early part of the day, unless
you interfere with them by bringing in social media is a good example of you immediately enter
somebody else's space time sensory relationship, someone is the conductor of your thoughts in
that case. And so many people have written about this, what I'm saying isn't entirely new, but
allowing the download to occur in the early part of the day. And asking the question,
am I more in my head or am I in more of an interoceptive or exteroceptive mode? And
depending on the kind of work you need to do, if it sounds like for you, it's very interoceptive
and very got a lot of thinking going on and a lot of computing going on, allowing yourself to
transition out of that sleep state and arrive with those solutions from sleep and plug into the work
really deeply. And then and only then allowing things like music, news, social media doesn't
mean you shouldn't talk to loved ones and see faces and things like that. But some people have
taken this to the extreme. When I was a graduate student at Berkeley, there was a guy there
was a professor is brilliant, odd, but brilliant, who was so fixated on this concept that he wouldn't
look at faces in the early part of the day, because he just didn't want to anything else to
impact him. Now he would didn't have the most rounded life, I suppose. But if you're talking
about cognitive performance, this could actually be very beneficial. You said so many brilliant
things. So one, if you read books that describe the habits of brilliant people like writers,
they do control that sensory experience in the in the hours after wake, like many writers,
you know, they have a particular habit of several hours early in the morning of actual
writing, they do don't do anything else for the rest of the day. But they control, they're very
sensitive to noises and so on. I think they make it very difficult to live with them. I try to,
I'm definitely like that, like I could, I, I love to control the sensory, how much information
is coming in. There's something about the peaceful, just everything being peaceful.
At the same time, and we were talking to a mutual friend of Whitney Cummings, who
has has a has a mansion, a castle on top of a cliff in the middle of nowhere, she actually
purchased her own island. She wants silence. She wants to control how much sound is coming in.
She's very sensitive to sound and environment. Yeah. Beautiful home and environment, but like
clearly puts a lot of attention into, into details. Yeah. And very creative. Yeah. And that's,
yeah, that allows for creativity to flourish. I'm also, I don't like, that feels like a slippery
slope. So I enjoy introducing noises and signals and training my mind to be able to tune them out.
Because I feel like you can't always control the environment so perfectly because,
because your mind gets comfortable with that. I think it's a skill that you want to learn to be
able to shut it off. Like I often go to like back before COVID to a coffee shop. It really
annoys me when there's sounds and voices and so on. But I feel like I can train my mind to block
them out. So it's a balance, I think. Yeah. And I think, you know, two things come to mind as
you're saying this. First of all, yeah, I mean, we're talking about what's best for work is not
always what's best for, you know, completeness of life. I mean, you know, autism is probably many
things. Like when you hit autism, just like feet, they're probably 50 ways to get a fever,
they're probably 50 ways to that the brain can create what looks like autism or what people
call autism. There's an interesting set of studies that have come out of David Ginty's lab at Harvard
Med looking at these are mouse mutants where these are models for autism where nothing is
disrupted in the brain proper and in the central nervous system. But the sensory app, the sensory
neurons, the ones that innervate the skin and the ears and everything are are hypersensitive.
And this maps to a mutation in certain forms of human autism. So this means that the overload of
sensory information and sensory experience that a lot of autistics feel, they're like that they
can't tolerate things. And then they get the stereotype behaviors, the rocking and the kind
of the shouting, it, you know, we always thought of that as a brain problem. In some cases, it might
be. But in many cases, it's because they just can't, they seem to have a, it's like turning the
volume up on every sense. And so they're overwhelmed. And none of us want to become like that. I think
it's very hard for them and it's hard for their parents and so forth. So I like the coffee shop
example because the way I think about trying to build up resilience, you know, physically or
mentally or otherwise is one of, I guess we could call it limb, I like to call it limbic friction,
that's not a real scientific term. And I acknowledge that I'm making it up now, because I think it
captures the concept, which is that, you know, we always hear about resilience, it makes it sound
like, oh, you know, under stress, where everything's coming at you, you're gonna stay calm. But there's
another, you know, so limbic, the limbic system wants to pull you in some direction, typically
in the direction of reflexive behavior. And the prefrontal cortex through top down mechanisms
has to suppress that and say, no, we're not going to respond to the banging of the coffee cups behind
me or I'm going to keep focusing. That's pure top down control. So limbic friction is high
in that environment, you've put yourself into a high limbic friction environment mean that the
prefrontal cortex has to work really hard. But there's another side to limbic friction too,
which is when you're very sleepy, there's nothing incoming, it can be completely silent.
And it's hard to engage and focus because you're drifting off and you're getting sleepy. So their
limbic friction is high, but for the opposite reason autonomic arousal is too low. So they're
turning on Netflix in the background or looping a song might boost your level of alertness that
will allow top down control to be in the play exactly the sweet spot you want it. So this is
why earlier I was saying it's all about how we feel inside relative to what's going on on the
outside. We're constantly in this, I guess one way you could envision it spatially, especially if
people are listening to this just an audio is I like to think about it kind of like a glass barbell
where one sphere of perception and attention can be on what's going on with me and one sphere of
attention can be on what's going on with you or something else in the room or in my environment.
But this barbell isn't rigid, it's not really glass. Would plasma work here? I don't know
anything about plasma. Sorry, I don't know. Okay. So imagine that this thing can contort the size
of the globes at the end of this barbell can get bigger or smaller. So let's say I close my eyes
and I bring all my experience into what's going on through interoception internally.
Now it's as if I've got two orbs of perception just on my internal state, but I can also do the
opposite and bring to both orbs of perception outside me. I'm not thinking about my heart rate
or my breathing, I'm just thinking about something I see. And what you'll start to realize as you
kind of use this spatial model is that two things, one is that it's very dynamic and that the more
relaxed we are, the more these two orbs of attention, the two ends of the barbell can move
around freely. The more alert we are, the more rigid they're going to be tethered in place.
And that was designed so that if I have a threat in my environment, it's tethered to that threat.
I'm not going to be, if something's coming to attack me, I'm not going to be like, oh,
my breathing cadence is a little bit quick. That's not how it works. Why? Because both orbs
are linked to that threat. And so my behavior is now actually being driven by something external,
even though I think it's internal. And so I don't want to get too abstract here because I'm a
neuroscientist, I'm not a theorist. But when you start thinking about models of how the brain
work, I mean, brain works, excuse me, they're only really three things that neurons do. They're
either sensory neurons, they're motor neurons, or they're modulating things. And the models of
attention and perception that we have now, 2020, tell us that we've got interoception and extra
reception. They're strongly modulated by levels of autonomic arousal. And that if we want to form
the optimal relationship to some task or some pressure or something, whether or not it's sleep
and impending threat or coding, we need to adjust our internal space time relationship with the
external space time relationship. And I realize I'm repeating what I said earlier. But we can
actually assign circuitry to this stuff. It mostly has to do with how much limbic friction there is,
how much you're being pulled to some source. That source could be internal. If I have pain,
physical pain in my body, I'm going to be much more interoceptive than I am exteroceptive.
You could be talking to me and I'm just going to be thinking about that pain. It's very hard.
And the other thing that we can link it to is top down control, meaning anything in our environment
that has a lot of salience will tend to bring us into more extra reception than interoception.
And again, I don't want to litter the conversation with just a bunch of terms. But
what I think it can be useful for people is to do what essentially you've done, Lex, is to start
developing an awareness. When I wake up, am I mostly in a mode of interoception or extra
reception? When I work well, what does working well look like from the perspective of autonomic
arousal? How alert or calm am I? What kind of balance between internal focus and external
focus is there? And to sort of watch this process throughout the day.
Can you just briefly use this term a lot and be nice to try to get a little more color to it,
which is interoception and extra reception? What are we exactly talking about? What's included
in each category and how much overlap is there? Interoception would be an awareness of anything
that's within the confines or on the surface of my skin that I'm sensing.
So literally physiological. Physiologically, like within the boundaries of my skin
and probably touch to the skin as well. Extra reception would be perception of anything that's
beyond the reach of my skin. So that bottle of water, a scent, a sound, although, and this
can change dramatically, actually, if you have headphones in, you tend to hear things in your
head as opposed to a speaker in the room. That's interesting, yeah.
This is actually the basis of ventriloquism. So there are beautiful experiments done by Greg
Reckon's own up at UC Davis looking at how auditory and visual cues are matched in an array
of speakers. And this will become obvious as I say it, but obviously the ventriloquist doesn't
throw their voice. What they do is they direct your vision to a particular location and you
think the sound is coming from that location. And there are beautiful experiments that Greg
and his colleagues have done where they suddenly introduce an auditory visual mismatch,
and it freaks people out because you can actually make it seem from a perception standpoint as if
the sound arrived from the corner of the room and hit you physically and people will recoil.
And so sounds aren't getting thrown across the room. They're still coming from this
defined location and array of speakers. But this is the way the brain creates these internal
representations. And again, not to, I don't want to go down a rabbit hole, but I think
as much as, I'm sure the listeners appreciate this, but everything in the brain is an abstraction.
I mean, the sensory apparatus that are the eyes and ears and nose and skin and taste and all that
are taking information and with interoception, taking information from sensors inside the body,
the enteric nervous system for the gut. I've got sensory neurons that innervate my liver,
etc., taking all that. And the brain is abstracting that in the same way that if I took a picture
of your face and I handed it to you and I'd say, that's you, you'd say, yeah, that's me.
But if I were an abstract artist, I'd be doing a little bit more of what the brain does,
where if I took a pen and pad and paper, maybe I could do this because I'm a terrible artist,
and I could just mix it up. And let's say I would make your eyes like water bottles,
but I'd flip them upside down and I'd start assigning fruits and objects to the different
features of your face. And I show it to you, I say, Lex, that's you. Say, well, that's not me.
And I'd say, no, but that's my abstraction of you. But that's what the brain does.
The space time relationship of the neurons that fire that encode your face has have no resemblance
to your face. Right. And I think people don't really, I don't know if people have fully internalized
that. But the day that I, and I'm not sure I fully internalized that, because it's weird to think
about, but all neurons can do is fire in space and in time, different neurons in different
sequences, perhaps with different intensities. It's not clear the action potential is all or none,
although neuroscientists don't like to talk about that, even though it's been published in nature
a couple of times. The action potential for a given neuron doesn't always have the exact same
waveform. People, it's in all the textbooks, but you can modify that waveform.
I mean, there's a lot of fascinating stuff with neuroscience about the fuzziness of all the,
of the transfer of information from neuron to neuron. I mean, we certainly touch upon it
every time we at all try to think about the difference between artificial neural networks and
biological neural networks. But can we maybe linger a little bit on this, on the circuitry
that you're getting at. So the brain is just a bunch of stuff firing and it forms abstractions
that are fascinating and beautiful, like layers upon layers upon layers of abstraction.
And I think it just like when you're programming, you know, on programming in Python,
it's awe inspiring to think that underneath it all, it ends up being zeros and ones.
And the computer doesn't know about no stupid Python or Windows or Linux. It only knows about
the zeros and ones in the same way with the brain. Is there something interesting to you
or fundamental to you about the circuitry of the brain that allows for the magic
that's in our mind to emerge? How much do we understand? I mean, maybe even focusing on the
vision system. Is there something specific about the structure of the vision system,
the circuitry of it that allows for the complexity of the vision system to emerge?
Or is it all just a complete chaotic mess that we don't understand?
It's definitely not all a chaotic mess that we don't understand if we're talking about vision.
And that's not just because I'm a vision scientist.
Let's stick to vision.
Let's stick to vision. Well, because in the beauty of the visual system,
the reason David Hubel and Tornton Weasel on the Nobel Prize was because they were
brilliant and forward thinking and adventurous and all that good stuff.
But the reason that the visual system is such a great model for addressing these kinds of
questions and other systems are hard is we can control the stimuli. We can adjust spatial frequency,
how finer the gratings are, thick gratings, thin gratings, we can adjust temporal frequency,
how fast things are moving. We can use coenisolating stimuli.
We can use it. There's so many things that you can do in a controlled way,
whereas if we're talking about cognitive encoding, encoding the space of concepts or
something, I like you, if I may, am drawn to the big questions in neuroscience.
But I confess, in part because of some good advice I got early in my career,
and in part because I'm not perhaps smart enough to go after the really high level stuff,
I also like to address things that are tractable. And we need to address what we can stand to make
some ground on at a given time. You can construct brilliant controlled experiments
to study, to really literally answer questions about it, yeah.
Yeah, I mean, I'm happy to have a talk about consciousness, but it's a scary talk, and I
think most people don't want to hear what I have to say, which is we can save that for later,
perhaps, or another day. I mean, it's an interesting question of
we talk about psychedelics, we can talk about consciousness, we can talk about cognition.
Can experiments in neuroscience be constructed to shed any kind of light on these questions?
So I mean, it's cool that vision, I mean, to me, vision is probably one of the most beautiful
things about human beings. Also, from the AI side, computer vision has some of the most
exciting applications of neural networks is in computer vision. But it feels like that's a
neighbor of cognition and consciousness. It's just that we maybe haven't come up with experiments
to study those yet. Yeah, the visual system is amazing. We're mostly visual animals to navigate
it, survive humans mainly rely on vision, not smell or something else. But it's a filter for
cognition, and it's a strong driver of cognition, maybe just because it came up and then we're
moving to higher level concepts. The way the visual system works can be summarized in a few
relatively succinct statements, unlike most of what I've said, which has not been succinct at all.
Let's go there. The retina. Yeah, so the retina is this three layers of neuron structure at the
back of your eyes, but I think it's a credit card. It is a piece of your brain. And sometimes people
think I'm kind of wriggling out of reality by saying that it's absolutely a piece of the brain.
It's a four brain structure that in the first trimester, there's a genetic program
that made sure that that neural retina, which is part of your central nervous system,
was squeezed out into what's called the embryonic eye cups, and that the bone formed with a little
hole where the optic nerve is going to connect it to the rest of the brain. And that window
into the world is the only window into the world for a mammal, which has a thick skull.
Birds have a thin skull, so their pineal gland sits and lizards too, and snakes actually have
a hole so that light can make it down into the pineal directly and in trained melatonin rhythms
for time of day and time of year. Humans have to do all that through the eyes.
So, three layers of neurons that are a piece of your brain, their central nervous system,
and the optic nerve connects to the rest of the brain. The neurons in the eye,
some just care about luminance, just how bright or dim it is, and they inform the brain about
time of day, and then the central circadian clock informs every cell in your body about time of
day and make sure that all sorts of good stuff happens if you're getting light in your eyes
at the right times, and all sorts of bad things happen if you are getting light randomly throughout
the 24 hour cycle. We could talk about all that, but this is a good incentive for keeping
a relatively normal schedule, consistent schedule of light exposure. Consistent schedule,
try and keep a consistent schedule. When you're young, it's easy to go off schedule and recover.
As you get older, it gets harder, but you see everything from outcomes in cancer patients to
diabetes improves when people are getting light at a particular time of day and getting darkness
at a particular phase of the 24 hour cycle. We were designed to get light and dark at different
times of the circadian cycle. All that information is coming in through specialized type of neuron
in the retina called the melanopsin intrinsically photosensitive ganglion cell discovered by
David Berson at Brown University. That's not spatial information. It's subconscious. You
don't think, oh, it's daytime. Even if you're looking at the sun, it doesn't matter. It's a
photon counter. It's literally counting photons. It's saying, oh, even though it's a cloudy day,
lots of photons coming in at winter in Boston, it must be winter, and your system is a little
depressed. It's spring, you feel alert. That's not a coincidence. That's these melanopsin cells
signaling the circadian clock. There are a bunch of other neurons in the eye that signal to the
brain, and they mainly signal the presence of things that are lighter than background or darker
than background. A black object would be darker than background, a light object lighter than
background. It's looking at pixels. Mainly, they look at circles, and those neurons have
receptive fields, which not everyone will understand, but those neurons respond best to
little circles of dark light or little circles of bright light. Little circles of red light versus
little circles of green light or blue light. It sounds very basic. It's like red, green, blue,
and circles brighter or dimmer than what's next to it. That's basically the only information that
sent down the optic nerve. When we say information, we can be very precise. I don't mean little bits
of red traveling down the optic nerve. I mean spikes, neural action potentials in space and time,
which for you makes total sense, but I think for a lot of people, it's actually beautiful to think
about all that information in the outside world is converted into a language that's very simple.
It's just a few syllables, if you will. Those syllables are being shouted down the optic
nerve converted into a totally different language like Morse code. Beep, beep, beep, beep, beep.
Goes into the brain, and then the thalamus essentially responds in the same way that the
retina does, except the thalamus is also weighting things. It's saying, you know what,
that thing was moving faster than everything else, or it's brighter than everything else,
so that signal I'm going to allow up to cortex. Or that signal is much redder than it is green,
so I'm going to let that signal go through that signal as much. It's kind of more like the red
next to it. Throw that out. The information just doesn't get up into your cortex. And then in cortex,
of course, is where perceptions happen. And in V1, if you will, visual area one,
but also some neighboring areas, you start getting representations of things like oriented lines. So
there's a neuron that responds to this angle of my hand versus vertical. This is the defining work
of Hubel and Wiesel's Nobel. And it's a very systematic map of orientation, line orientation,
direction of movement, and so forth. And that's pretty much end color. And that's how the visual
system is organized all the way up to the cortex. So it's hierarchical. You don't build, I want to
be clear, it's hierarchical because you don't build up that line by suddenly having a neuron that
responds to lines in some random way. It responds to lines by taking all the dots that are aligned
in a vertical stack, and they all converge on one neuron. And then that neuron responds to vertical
lines. So it's not random. There's no abstraction at that point, in fact. In fact, if I showed you
a black line, I could be sure that if I were imaging V1, that I would see a representation
of that black line as a vertical line somewhere in your cortex. So at that point, it's absolutely
concrete. It's not abstract. But then things get really mysterious. Some of that information travels
further up into the cortex and goes from one visual area to the next, to the next, to the next,
so that by time you get into an area that Nancy Kenwisher at MIT has studied much of her career,
the fusiform face area, you start finding single neurons that respond only to your father's face
or to Joe Rogan's face, regardless of the orientation of his face. I'm sure if you saw Joe,
because you know him well, from across the room and you just saw his profile, you'd be like,
oh, that's Joe. Walk over and say hello. The orientation of his face isn't there. You wouldn't
even see his eyes necessarily. But he's represented in some abstract way by a neuron that actually
would be called the Joe Rogan neuron or collection neurons. You might have limits. I might not
recognize him if he was upside down or something like that. It'd be fascinating to see what the
limits of that Joe Rogan concept is. So Nancy's lab has done that because early on,
she was challenged by people that said there aren't face neurons. There are neurons that
they only respond to space and time, shapes and things like that, moving in particular
directions and orientations. And it turns out Nancy was right. They used these stimuli
called greeble stimuli, which any computer programmer would appreciate, which kind of morphs
a face into something gradually that eventually just looks like this alien thing they call the
greeble. And the neurons don't respond to greebles. In most cases, they only respond to faces and
familiar faces. Anyway, I'm summarizing a lot of literature and forgive me, Nancy, and for those
of the greeble people, if there are anything like, don't come after me with pitchforks. Actually,
you know what? Come after me with pitchforks. I think you know what I'm trying to do here.
So the point is that in the visual system, it's very concrete up until about visual area four,
which has color pinwheels and seems to respond to pinwheels of colors. And so the stimuli become
more and more elaborate. But at some point, you depart that concrete representation and you start
getting abstract representations that can't be explained by simple point to point wiring.
And to take a leap out of the visual system to the higher level concepts,
what we talked about in the visual system, maps to the auditory system where you're encoding what
that frequency of tone sweeps. So this is going to sound weird to do, but like a Doppler,
like hearing something, car passing by, for instance. But at some point, you get into motifs
of music that can't be mapped to just what they call a tonotopic map of frequency. You start
abstracting. And if you start thinking about concepts of creativity and love and memory,
like what is the map of memory space? Well, your memories are very different than mine,
but presumably there's enough structure at the early stages of memory processing,
or at the early stages of emotional processing, or at the earlier stages of creative processing
that you have the building blocks, your zeros and ones, if you will,
but you depart from that eventually. Now, the exception to this, and I want to be really clear
because I was just mainly talking about neocortex, the six layered structure on the outside of the
brain that explains a lot of human abilities, other animals have them too, is that subcortical
structures are a lot more like machines. It's more plung and chug. And what I'm talking about
is the machinery that controls heart rate and breathing and receptive fields, neurons that
respond to things like temperature on the top of my left hand. And I came into neuroscience from
the more of a perspective initially of psychology, but one of the reasons I forced upon myself to
learn some electrophysiology, not a ton, but enough. And some molecular biology and about
circuitry is that one of the most beautiful experiences you can have in life, I'm convinced,
is to lower an electrode into the cortex and to show a person or an animal,
you do this ethically, of course, stimulus, like an oriented line or a face. And you can
convert the recordings coming off of that electrode into an audio signal, an audio monitor,
and you can hear what they call hash. It's not the hash you smoke, it's the hash you hear,
and it sounds like noise. And in the cortex, eventually you find a stimulus that gets the
neuron to spike in fire action potentials that convert it into an auditory stimulus
that are very concrete. Crack, crack, crack sounds like a bat cracking, like home runs
or outfield balls. When you drop electrodes deeper into the thalamus or into the hypothalamus
or into the brainstem areas that control breathing, it's like a machine. You never hear
hash. You drop the electrode down. This could be like a grungy old Tuggestin electrode,
not high fidelity electrode, as long as it's got a little bit of insulation on it. You plug
it into an audio monitor, it's picking up electricity. And if it's a visual neuron and
it's in the thalamus or the retina and you walk in front of that animal or person, that neuron goes
crack, and then you walk away and it stops. And you put your hand in front of the eye again and
it goes crack, and you could do that for two days. And that neuron will just, every time
there's a stimulus, it fires. So whereas before, it's a question of how much information is getting
up to cortex. And then these abstractions happening where you're creating these ideas,
when you go subcortical, everything is... There's no abstractions. It's two plus two equals four.
There's no abstractions. And this is why I know we have some common friends at Neural Link.
And I love the demonstration they did recently. I'm a huge fan of what they're doing and where
they're headed. And no, I don't get paid to say that. And I have no business relationship to them.
I'm just a huge fan of the people in the mission. But my question was to some of them,
when are you going to go subcortical? Because if you want to control an animal,
you don't do it in the cortex. The cortex is like the abstract painting I made of your face.
Removing one piece or changing something may or may not matter for the abstraction. But when
you are in the subcortical areas of the brain, a stimulating electro can evoke an entire behavior
or an entire state. And so the brain, if we're going to have a discussion about the brain and how
the brain works, we need to really be clear which brain. Because everyone loves neocortex.
It's like, oh, canonical circuits in cortex, we can get the cortical connectome. And sure,
necessary, but not sufficient. Not to be able to plug in patterns of electrical stimulation
and get behavior. Eventually we'll get there. But if you're talking subcortical circuits,
that's where the action is. That's where you could potentially cure Parkinson's by stimulating
the subthalamic nucleus. Because we know that it gates motor activation patterns in very predictable
ways. So I think for those that are interested in neuroscience, it pays to pay attention to,
like, is this a circuit that abstracts the sensory information? Or is it just one that builds up
hierarchical models in a very predictable way? And there's a huge chasm in neuroscience right
now because there's no conceptual leadership. No one knows which way to go. And this is why I think
Neuralink has captured an amazing opportunity, which was, okay, well, while all you academic
research labs are figuring all this stuff out, we're going to pick a very specific goal and make
the goal the endpoint. And some academic laboratories do that. But I think that's a beautiful way to
attack this whole thing about the brain because it's very concrete. Let's restore motion to the
Parkinsonian patient. Academic labs want to do that too, of course. Let's restore
speech to the stroke patient. But there's nothing abstract about that. That's about
figuring out the solution to a particular problem. So anyway, those are my, and I admit I've mixed
in a lot of opinion there. But having spent some time, like 25 years digging around in the brain
and listening to neurons firing and looking at them anatomically, I think, given it's 2020,
we need to ask the right, you know, the way to get better answers, ask better questions. And
the really high level stuff is fun. It makes for good conversation. And it has brought enormous
interest. But I think the questions about consciousness and dreaming and stuff, they're
fascinating. But I don't know that we're there yet.
So you're saying there might be a chasm in the two views
of the power of the brain arising from the circuitry that forms abstractions or the power of
the brain arising from the majority of the circuitry that's just doing very brute force
dumb things that don't have any fancy kind of stuff going on. That's really interesting to think
about. And which one to go after first? And here I'm poaching badly from someone I've never met,
but whose work I follow, which is, and it was actually on your podcast, I think Elon Musk
said, you know, basically the brain is a monkey brain with a supercomputer on top.
And I thought that's actually probably the best description of the brain I've ever heard,
because it captures a lot of important features like limbic friction, right? But we think of like,
oh, you know, when we're making plans, we're using the prefrontal cortex and we're
executive function and all this kind of stuff. But think about the drug addict,
who's driven to go pursue heroin or cocaine, they make plans. So clearly they use their
frontal cortex, it's just that it's been hijacked by the limbic system and all the monkey brain
as you refer to. It's really not fair to monkeys though, Elon, because actually monkeys can make
plans. They just don't make plans as sophisticated as us. I've spent a lot of time with monkeys,
but I've also spent a lot of time with humans. Anyway, I'm you're putting you're saying like,
which there's a lot of value to focusing on the monkey brain or whatever the heck you call it.
I do because let's say I had an ability to place a chip anywhere I wanted in the brain today,
and activate it or inhibit that area. I'm not sure I would put that chip in neocortex,
except maybe to just kind of have some fun and see what happens. The reason is it's an
abstraction machine. And especially if I wanted to make a mass production tool, a tool in mass
production that I could give to a lot of people, because it's quite possible that your abstractions
are different enough than mine, that I wouldn't know what patterns of firing to induce. But if I
want, let's say I want to increase my level of focus and creativity, well, then I would love to
be able to, for instance, control my level of limbic friction. I would love to be able to wake up
and go, oh, you know, I have an eight o clock appointment, I wake up slowly. So between seven,
eight, but I want to do a lot of linear thinking. So you know what, I'm going to just, I'm going to
turn down the limbic friction and or ramp up prefrontal cortex is activation. So there's a
lot of stuff that can happen in the thalamus with sensory gating. For instance, you could shut down
that shell around the thalamus and allow more creative thinking by allowing more lateral
connections. These would be some of the those would be the experiments I'd want to do. So
they're in the subcortical, quote unquote, monkey brain. But you could then look at what
sorts of abstract thoughts and behaviors would arise from that, rather than and here I'm not
pointing my finger at neural link at all. But there's this obsession with neocortex. But I'm
going to, well, I might lose a few friends, but I'll hopefully gain a few. And also,
one of the reasons people spend so much time in neocortex is I have a fact and an opinion. One
fact is that you can image there and you can record there. Right now, the two photon and one
photon microscopy methods that allow you to image deep into the brain still don't allow you to image
down really deep unless you're jamming prisms in there and endoscopes. And then the endoscopes
are very narrow. So you're getting very, you know, it's like looking at the bottom of the ocean
through a through a spotlight. And so you much easier look at the waves up on top, right? So
let's face it, folks, a lot of the reasons why there's so many recordings in layer two, three of
cortex with all this advanced microscopy is because it's very hard to image deeper. Now,
the microscopes are getting better. And thanks to the amazing work mainly of engineers and
chemists and physicists, let's face it, they're the ones who brought this revolution to neuroscience
in the last 10 years or so, you can image deeper. But we don't really, that's why you see so many
reports on layer two, three. The other thing, which is purely opinion, and I'm not going after
anybody here, but is that as long as there's no clear right answer, it becomes a little easier
to do creative work in a structure where no one really knows how it works. So it's fun to probe
around because anything you see is novel. If you're going to work in the thalamus or the pulvinar or
the hypothalamus or these structures they've been known about since the 60s and 70s and really
since the centuries ago, you are dealing with exist, you have to combat existing models.
Yeah. And we're as in cortex, no one knows how the thing works. Neocortex, six layer cortex.
And so there's a lot more room for discovery. There's a lot more room for discovery. And I'm
not calling anyone out. I love cortex. We've published some papers on cortex. It's super
interesting. But I think with the tools that are available nowadays, and where people are trying
to head of not just reading from the brain, monitoring activity, but writing to the brain,
I think we really have to be careful and we need to be thoughtful about what are we trying to write?
What script are we trying to write? Because there are many brain structures for which we
already know what scripts they write. And I think there's tremendous value there. I don't think it's
boring. The fact that they act like machines makes them predictable. Those are your zeros and ones.
Let's start there. But what's sort of happening in this field of writing to the brain is there's
this idea. And again, I want to be clear, I'm not pointing at neural link. I'm mainly pointing at
the neocortical jockeys out there that you go in, you observe patterns, and then you think replaying
those patterns is going to give rise to something interesting. I should call out one experiment
or two experiments which were done by Sasumoto Nagawa, Nobel Prize winner from MIT, done important
work in memory and immunology, of course, as well as Mark Mayford's lab at UC San Diego.
They did an experiment where they monitored a bunch of neurons while an animal learned something.
Then they captured those neurons through some molecular tricks so they could replay the neurons.
So now there's like perfect case scenario. It's like, okay, you monitor the neurons in your brain,
then I say, okay, neurons one through 100 were played in the particular sequence. So you know
the space time, you know the keys on the piano that were played that gave rise to the song,
which was the behavior. And then you go back and you reactivate those neurons, except you
reactivate them all at once, like slamming on all the keys once on the piano. And you get the exact
same behavior. So the space time code may be meaningless for some structures. Now that's
freaky. That's a scary thing because what that means is that all the space time firing in cortex,
the space part may matter more than the time part. So you know, rate codes and space time codes,
we don't know. And you know, I'd rather have more, I'd rather deliver more answers in this
discussion questions. But I think it's an important consideration. You're saying some of the magic
is in the early stages of what the closer to the raw information. I believe so. I believe so. You
know the stimulus, you know, the neuron then codes that stimulus, so you know the transformation.
When I say this for those that will think about sensory transformations, it's like,
I can show you a red circle. And then I look at how many times the neuron fires in response to
that red circle. And then I could show the red circle a bunch of times, green circle,
see if it changes. And then essentially the number of times that is the transformation,
you've converted red circle into like three action potentials, you know,
or whatever you want to call it, you know, for those that think in sound space. So
that's what you've created, you know, the transformation and you march up the, it's
called the nerve axis as you go from the periphery up into the cortex. And we know that,
and I know Lisa Feldman Barrett, or is it Barrett Feldman? Barrett Feldman, excuse me,
Lisa, that talked a lot about this, that, you know, birds can do sophisticated things and
whatnot as well. But humans, there's a strong what we call sephalization. A lot of the processing
is moved up into the cortex and out of these subcortical areas. But it happens nonetheless.
And so as long as you know the transformations, you are in a perfect place to build machines
or add machines to the brain that exactly mimic what the brain wants to do, which is take events
in the environment and turn them into internal firing of neurons. So the mastery of the brain
can happen at their early load. You know, another perspective of it is you saying this means that
humans aren't that special. If we look at the evolutionary time scale, the leap to intelligence
is not that special. So like the extra layers of abstraction isn't where most of the magic
happens of intelligence, which gives me hope that maybe if that's true, that means the evolution
of intelligence is not that rare of an event. I certainly hope not. I hope there are other
forms of intelligence. I mean, I think what humans are really good at, and here I want to
be clear that this is not a formal model, but what humans are really good at is taking that
plasma barbell that we were talking about earlier and not just using it for analysis of space,
like the your media environment, but also using historical information. Like I can read a book
today about the history of medicine. I happen to be doing that lately for some stuff I'm researching.
And I can take that information. And if I want, I can inject it into my plans for the future.
Other animals don't seem to do that over the same time scales that we do. Now, it may be that the
chipmunks are all hiding little notebooks everywhere in the form of little dirt castles or
something that we don't understand. I mean, the waggle dance of the bee is in the most famous
example. Bees come back to the hive, they orient relative to the honeycomb, and they waggle.
There's a guy down in Australia named Serena Vissan who studied this in it. It's really
interesting. No one really understands it except he understands it best. The bee waggles in a couple
ways relative to the orientation of the honeycomb. And then all the other bees see that it's visual
and they go out and they know the exact coordinate system to get to the source of whatever was the
food and bring it back. And he's done it where they isolate the bees, he's changed the visual
flight environment, all this stuff. They are communicating. And they're communicating something
about something they saw recently, but it doesn't extend over very long periods of time.
The same way that you and I can both read a book or you can recommend something to me and then we
could converge on a set of ideas later. And in fairness, because she was the one that said it
and I didn't and I hadn't even thought of it, when you talked to Lisa on your podcast, she
brought up something beautiful, which is that I never really occurred to me and I was sort of
embarrassed that it hadn't. But it's really beautiful and brilliant, which is that we don't
just encode senses in the form of color and light and sound waves and taste, but ideas become a form
of sensory mapping. And that's where the really, really cool and exciting stuff is, but we just
don't understand what the receptive fields are for ideas. What's an idea of receptive field?
And how they're communicated between humans because we seem to be able to encode those ideas
in some kind of way. Yes, it's taking all the raw information and the internal physical states,
the that sensory information put into this concept blob that we store and then we're
able to communicate that. Your abstractions are different than mine. I actually think the
comment section on social media is a beautiful example of where the abstractions
are different for different people. So much of the misunderstanding of the world
is because of these idea receptive fields. They're not the same. Whereas I can look at
a photoreceptor neuron or olfactory neuron or a V1 neuron. And I am certain I would bet my life
that yours look and respond exactly the same way that Lisa's do and mine do. But once you get
beyond there, it gets tricky. And so when you say something or I say something and somebody gets upset
about it or even happy about it, their concept of that might be quite a bit different. They don't
really know what you mean. They only know what it means to them. Yeah, so from a neural link
perspective, it makes sense to optimize the control and the augmentation of the of the more
primitive circuitry. So like the stuff that is closer to the raw sensory information.
Go deeper if they I think by the way deeper into the brain. And to be fair, so Matt McDougall,
who's the neurosurgeon neural link and clinical nurse, a great guy, brilliant. They have amazing
people. I have to give it to them. They have been very cryptic in recent years. Their website was
just like a neural like nothing there. They really know how to do things with style and
they've upset a lot of people, but that's good too. But Matt is there. I know Matt,
he actually came out through my lab at Stanford, although he was a neurosurgery resident. We
spent time in our lab. He actually came out on the shark dive and did great white shark diving
with my lab to collect the VR that we use in our fear stuff. I've talked to Matt and I think he
and other folks that are hungry for the deeper brain structures. The problem is that damn vasculature,
all that blood supply. It's not trivial to get through and down into the brain without damaging
the vasculature in the neocortex, which is on the outer crust. But once you start getting into
the thalamus and closer to some of the main arterial sources, you really risk getting
massive bleeds. It's an issue that can be worked out. It just is hard.
Maybe it'd be nice to educate. I'm sure of my ignorance. The smart stuff is on the surface.
I didn't quite realize because you keep saying deep. The early stages are deep
in actual physically in the brain. Of course, you've got your deep brain structures that
are involved in breathing and heart rate and kind of lizard brain stuff. And then on top of that,
this is the model of the brain that no one really subscribes to anymore. But anatomically,
it works. And then on top in mammals. And then on top of that, you have the limbic structures,
which gate sensory information and decide whether or not you're going to listen to
something more that you're going to look at it or you're going to split your attention to both.
Kind of sensory allocation stuff. And then the neocortex is on the outside. And that is where
you get a lot of this abstraction stuff. And now not all cortical areas are doing abstraction,
some are like visual area one, auditory area one, they're just doing concrete representations.
But as you get into the higher order stuff, that when you start hearing names like
infro, parietal cortex, and when you start hearing multiple names in the same,
then you're talking about higher order areas. But actually, there's an important experiment
that drives a lot of what people want to do with brain machine interface. And that's the work of
Bill Newsom, who is at Stanford and Tony Moveshin, who runs the Center for Neural Science at NYU.
This is a wild experiment. And I think it might freak a few people out if they really think about
it too deeply. But anyway, here he goes. There's an area called MT in the cortex. And if I showed
you a bunch of dots all moving up, and this is what Tony and Bill and some of the other people
in that lab did way back when, is they show a bunch of dots moving up. Somewhere in MT,
there are some neurons that respond, they fire when the neurons move up. And then what they did
is they started varying the coherence of that motion. So they made it so only 50% of the dots
moved up and the rest move randomly. And that neuron fires a little less. And eventually,
it's random and that neuron stops firing because it's just kind of dots moving everywhere.
It's awesome. And there's a systematic map so that other neurons are responding and
things moving down and other things are responding left and other things are moving right. Okay.
So there's a map of direction space. Okay, well, that's great. You could lesion MT,
animals lose the ability to do these kind of coherence discrimination or direction
discrimination. But the amazing experiment, the one that just is kind of eerie, is that
they lowered a stimulating electrode into MT, found a neuron that responds to when dots go up. But
then they silenced that neuron. And sure enough, the animal doesn't recognize the neurons are going
up. And then they move the dots down. They stimulate the neuron that responds to things
moving up. And the animal responds, because it can't speak, it responds by doing a lever
press, which says the dots are moving up. So in other words, the sensory, the dots are moving
down in reality on the computer screen. They're stimulating the neuron that responds to dots
moving up. And the perception of the animal is that dots are moving up, which tells you that
your perception of external reality absolutely has to be a neuronal abstraction. It is not
tacked to the movement of the dots in any absolute way. Your perception of the outside world depends
entirely on the activation patterns of neurons in the brain. And you can hear that and say, well,
duh, because if I stimulate the stretch reflex and you kick or something or whatever,
the knee reflex, and you kick, of course, there's a neuron that triggers that,
but it didn't have to be that way. Because A, the animal had prior experience. B,
you're way up in this higher order cortical areas. What this means is that, and I generally try to
avoid conversations about this kind of thing, but what this means is that we are constructing our
reality with this space time firing the zeros and ones. And it doesn't have to have anything to do
with the actual reality. And the animal or person can be absolutely convinced that that's what's
happening. Are you familiar with the work of Donald Hoffman? So he's, so he makes an evolution
argument. That's not important. That we, our brains are completely detached from reality,
in the sense that he makes a radical case that we have no idea what physical reality is. And in fact,
is drastically different than what we think it is. Oh my. So he goes, that's scary. So he doesn't
say like there's just, because you're kind of implying there's a, there's a gap. There might,
there might be a gap. We're constructing an illusion. And then maybe using communication to
maybe create a consistency that's sufficient for human collaboration, whatever, or mammal could,
you know, just maybe even just life forms are constructing a consistent reality that's maybe
detached. I mean, that's really cool that neurons are constructing that, like that you can prove
this is when you were science at his best vision science. But he says that like, our brain is actually
just lost its shit on the path of evolution to where we're normal. We're just playing games
with each other in constructing realities that allow our survival. But it's completely detached
from physical reality. We're missing a lot. We're missing like most of it, if not all of it.
Well, this was, it's fascinating because I just saw the Oliver Sacks documentary,
there's a new documentary out about his life. And there's this one part where he's like,
I've spent part of my life trying to imagine what it would like to be to be a bat or something to
see the world through the life, the sensory apparatus of a bat. And he did this with these
patients that were locked into these horrible syndromes that to pull out some of the beauty of
their experience as well, not just communicate the suffering, although the suffering too.
And as I was listening to him talk about this, I started to realize, it's like,
well, what, you know, like they're these mantis shrimps that can see 60 shades of
pink or something. And they see this stuff all the time and animals, they can see UV light.
Every time I learn about an animal that can sense other things in the environment that I
can't like heat sensing, why not? I don't crave that experience the same way Sacks talked about
craving that experience. But it does throw another penny in the jar for what you're saying, which is
that it could be that most, if not all of what I perceive and believe is just a neural fabrication.
And that for better or for worse, we all agree on enough of the same neural
fabrications in the same time and place that we're able to function.
Not only that, but we agree with the things that are trying to eat us
enough to where we don't, they don't eat us, meaning like that it's not just us humans,
you know, I see, because it's interactive, it's interactive. So like, so like, now,
I think it's a really nice thought experiment. I think because Donald really frames it in a
scientific, like he makes a hard, like as hard as our discussion has been now, he makes a hard
scientific case that we don't know shit about reality. I think that's a little bit hard core,
but I think it's, I think it's our core. But I think it's a good thought experiment
that kind of cleanses the palate of the confidence we might have about about because we are operating
in the subtraction space. And, you know, and, you know, the sensory spaces might be something very
different. And it's kind of interesting to think about if you start to go into a realm of neural
link or start to talk about just everything that you've been talking about with dream states and
psychedelics and stuff like that, which part of the which layer can we control and play around with
to maybe look into a different slice of reality? You just got to do the experiment. The key is to
just do the experiment in the most ethical way possible. You just, I mean, that's the beauty
of experiments. This is why, you know, there's, there's wonderful theoretical neuroscience happening
now to make predictions. But that's why experimental science is so wonderful. You can go into the
laboratory and poke around in there and be a brain explorer and listen to and write to neurons.
And when you do that, you get answers. You don't always get the answers you want, but that's,
you know, that's the beauty of it. I think when you were saying this thing about reality and the
Donald Hoffman model, I was thinking about children, you know, like when I have an older
sister, she's very sane. But when she was a kid, she had an imaginary friend. And she played with
this imaginary friend. And it had, there was this whole, there was a consistency. This friend was
like, it was Larry lived in a purple house. Larry was a girl. It was like all this stuff that a
child, a young child wouldn't have any issue with. And then one day she announced that Larry had
died, right? And it wasn't traumatic or traumatic. And that was it. And she just stopped. And I
always wonder what that neurodevelopmental event was that a kept her out of a psychiatric ward
had she got, you know, kept that imaginary friend. But it's also there was something kind of sad to
it. I think the way it was told to me because I'm the younger brother, I didn't, I wasn't around
for that. But my dad told me that, you know, there was a kind of a sadness because it was this
beautiful reality that had been constructed. And so we kind of wonder, I wonder as you're
telling me this, whether or not, you know, as adults, we try and create as much reality for
children as we can so that they can make predictions and feel safe because the ability to make
predictions is a lot of what keeps our autonomic arousal in check. I mean, we go to sleep every
night and we give up total control. And that should frighten us deeply. But, you know,
unfortunately, autonomic arousal be yanks us down under and we don't negotiate too much.
So you sleep sooner or later. I don't know. I was a little worried we get into discussions
about the nature of reality because it's interesting. In the laboratory, I'm very much
like, what's the experiment? What's the analysis going to look like? What mutant mouse are we going
to use? What experience are we going to put someone through? But I think it's wonderful
that in 2020, we can finally have discussions about this stuff and look kind of peek around
the corner and say, well, no link. And people, others who are doing similar things,
are going to figure it out. The answers will show up and we just have to be open to interpretation.
Do you think there could be an experiment centered around consciousness? I mean, you're
plugged into the neuroscience community. I think for the longest time, the quote unquote,
C word was totally not, was almost anti scientific. But now more and more people are talking about
consciousness. Elon is talking about consciousness. AI folks are talking about consciousness.
It's still nobody knows anything, but it feels like a legitimate domain of inquiry that's hungry
for a real experiment. So I have, fortunately, three short answers to this.
The first one is a, I'm not, I'm not particularly succinct. I agree. The joke I always tell is
there are two things you never want to say to a scientist. One is what do you do? And the second
one is take as much time as you need. And you definitely don't want to say them in the same
sentence. I have three short answers to it. So there's a, there's a cynical answer kind of,
and it's not one I enjoy giving, which is that if you look into the 70s and a back at the 1970s
and 1980s, and even into the early 2000s, there were some very dynamic, very impressive speakers
who are very smart in the field of neuroscience and related fields who thought hard about the
consciousness problem and fell in love with the problem, but overlooked the fact that the
technology wasn't there. So I admire them for falling in love with the problem, but they gleaned
tremendous taxpayer resources, essentially for nothing. And these people know who they are,
some of them are alive, some of them aren't. I'm not referring to Francis Crick, who was brilliant,
by the way, and thought the classroom was involved in consciousness, which I think is a
great idea. It's this obscure structure that no one's really studied. People are now starting
to study it. So I think Francis was brilliant and wonderful. But there it, you know, there were
books written about it. It makes for great television stuff and thought around the table
or after a couple glasses of wine or whatever. It's an important problem nonetheless. And so I
think I do think the consciousness, the issue is it's not operationally defined, right? That
psychologists are much smarter than a lot of hard scientists in that for the following reason,
and they put operational definitions. They know that psychology, if we're talking about motivation,
for instance, they know they need to put operational definitions on that so that
two laboratories can know they're studying the same thing. The problem with consciousness is
no one can agree on what that is. And this was a problem for attention when I was coming up. So
in the early 2000s, people would argue, what is attention? Is it spatial attention, auditory
attention? And finally, people are like, you know what, we agree. Have they agreed on that one?
I remember hearing people scream a lot of attention. Right. They couldn't even agree on
attention. So I was coming up as a young graduate student, I'm thinking like,
I'm definitely not going to work on attention. And I'm definitely not going to work on consciousness.
And I wanted something that I could solve or figure out. I want to be able to see the circuit
or the neurons. I want to be able to hear it on the audio. I want to record from it. And then I
want to do gain a function and loss a function, take it away, see something change, put it back,
see something change a systematic way. And that takes you down into the depths of some stuff
that's pretty plug and chug. But I'll borrow from something in the military because I'm
fortunate to do some work with units from special operations and they have beautiful language
around things because their world is not abstract. And they talk about three meter targets,
10 meter targets and 100 meter targets. And it's not an issue of picking the 100 meter target
because it's more beautiful or because it's more interesting. If you don't take down the
three meter targets and the 10 meter targets first, you're dead. So I think scientists could pay to
adopt a more kind of military thinking in that sense. The other thing that is really
important is that just because somebody conceived of something and can talk about it beautifully
and can glean a lot of resources for it, doesn't mean that it's led anywhere. So this isn't just
true of the consciousness issue. And I don't want to sound cynical, but I could pull up some names
of molecules that occupied hundreds of articles in the very premier journals that then were later
discovered to be totally moot for that process. And biotech companies folded everyone and the
lab pivots and starts doing something different with that molecule. And nobody talks about it
because as long as you're in the game, we have this thing called anonymous peer review. You
can't afford to piss off anybody too much unless you have some other funding stream. And I have
avoided battles most of my career, but I pay attention to all of it. And I've watched this
and I don't think it's ego driven. I think it's that people fall in love with an idea. I don't
think there's any, there's not enough money in science for people to sit back there rubbing
their hands together. The beauty of what Neuralink and Elon and team, because obviously he's
very impressive, but the team as a whole is really what gives me great confidence in their mission,
is that he's already got enough money, so it can't be about that. He doesn't seem to need it at a
level of, I don't know him, but he doesn't seem to need it at a kind of an ego level or something.
I think it's driven by genuine curiosity. And the team that he's assembled include people that
are very kind of abstract neuro neocortex, space time coding people. They're people like Matt,
who is a neurosurgeon. You can't BS neurosurgery. Failures in neurosurgery are not tolerated,
so you have to be very good to exceptional to even get through the gate. And he's exceptional.
And then they've got people like Dan Adams, who was at UCSF for a long time, is a good
friend and a known name for years, who is very concrete, studied the vasculature in the eye
and how it maps to the vasculature in cortex. When you get a team like that together,
you're going to have dissenters. You're going to have people that are high level thinkers,
people that are coders. When you get a team like that, it no longer looks like an academic
laboratory or even a field in science. And so I think they're going to solve some really hard
problems. And again, I'm not here, I have nothing at stake with them. But I think that's the solution.
You need a bunch of people who don't need first author papers, who don't need to complete their
PhD, who aren't relying on outside funding, who have a clear mission, and you have a bunch of
people who are basically will adapt to solve the problem. I like the analogy of the three
meter target and the hundred meter target. So the folks at Neuralink are basically many of them
are some of the best people in the world at the three meter target. Like you mentioned Matt,
Neurosurgery, like they're solving real problems. There's no BS, philosophical
smoke. So we need to look back and look at the stars. But
so both on Elon and because I think like this, I think it's really important to think about
the hundred meter and the hundred meter is not even not even a hundred meter, but like
like the stuff behind the hill that's that's that's too far too far away, which is which is
where I put consciousness. I'm maybe I tend to believe that consciousness can be engineered.
I mean, part of the reason part of the the the business I want to build leverages that idea
that consciousness is a lot simpler that we've then we've been talking about.
Well, if someone can simplify the problem, right, that will be wonderful. I mean, the reason we can
talk about something as abstract as face representations and fusiform face area is
because Nancy Kenwisher had the brilliance to tie it to the kind of lower level statistics
of visual scenes. It wasn't because she was like, oh, I bet it's there. That wouldn't have been
interesting. So people like her understand how to bridge that gap. And they put a tractable definition.
So I just that's what I'm begging for in science is a tractable definition.
This is what but I want people to sit in it. I want people who are really uncomfortable with
woo woo, like consciousness, like high level stuff to sit in that topic and sit uncomfortably,
because it forces them to then try to ground and simplify it into something that's concrete.
Because too many people are just uncomfortable to sit in the consciousness room,
because there's no definitions. It's like attention or intelligence in the artificial
intelligence community. But the reality is, it's easy to avoid that room all together,
which is what I mean, there's analogies to everything you've said with the artificial
intelligence community with Minsky and even Alan Turing that talked about intelligence a lot.
And then they drew a lot of funding and then it crashed because they really didn't do anything
with it. And it was a lot of force of personality and so on. But that doesn't mean the topic of
the Turing test and intelligence isn't something we should sit on and think. Turing actually
attempted this with the Turing test. He tried to make concrete this very question of intelligence.
It doesn't mean that we shouldn't linger on it. And we shouldn't forget that ultimately that is
what our efforts are all about in the artificial intelligence community. And in the people,
whether it's neuroscience or whatever bigger umbrella you want to use for understanding the
mind, the goal is not just about understanding layer two or three of the vision. It's to understand
consciousness and intelligence and maybe create it or just all the possible biggest questions
of our universe. That's ultimately the dream. Absolutely. And I think what I really appreciate
about what you're saying is that everybody, whether or not they're working on a kind of
low level synapse that's like a reflex in the musculature or something very high level abstract
can benefit from looking at those who prefer three, everyone's going after three meter,
10 meter and 100 meter targets in some sense. But to be able to tolerate the discomfort of
being in a conversation where there are real answers where the zeros and ones are known zeros
and ones are those the equivalent of them in the nervous system. And also, as you said,
for the people that are very much like, oh, I can only trust what I can see and touch,
those people need to put themselves into the discomfort of the high level conversation because
what's missing is conversation and conceptualization of things at multiple levels. I think one of the
this is I don't gripe about my life's been fortunate, we've been funded from the start and
we've been happy in that regard and lucky and we're grateful for that. But I think one of the
challenges of research being so expensive is that there isn't a lot of time, especially nowadays,
for people to just convene around a topic because there's so much emphasis on productivity. And
so there are actually, believe it or not, there aren't that many concepts, formal concepts in
neuroscience right now. The last 10 years has been this huge influx of tools. And so people
in neural circuits and probing around and connectomes, it's been wonderful. But 10,
20 years ago, when the consciousness stuff was more prominent, the C word, as you said,
what was good about that time is that people would go to meetings and actually discuss ideas and
models. Now, it's sort of like demonstration day at the School of Science Fair where everyone's
got their thing and some stuff is cooler than others. But I think we're going to see a shift.
I'm grateful that we have so many computer scientists and theoreticians and or theorists,
I think they call themselves. Somebody tell me what the difference is someday. And psychology and
even dare I say philosophy, these things are starting to converge. Neuroscience,
the name neuroscience, there wasn't even such a thing. When I started graduate school or as a
postdoc, it was neurophysiology or you're a neuroanatomist or what now, it's sort of everybody's
invited. And that's beautiful. That means that something useful is going to come up all this.
And there's also tremendous work, of course, happening for the treatment of disease. And
we shouldn't overlook that. That's where eliminating, reducing suffering is also a huge
initiative of neuroscience. So there's a lot of beauty in the field. But the consciousness thing
continues to be a, it's like an exotic bird. It's like, no one really quite knows how to handle it
and it dies very easily. Well, yeah, I think also from the AI perspective, I so I view the brain
as less sacred. I think from a neuroscience perspective, you're a little bit more sensitive
to BS, like BS narratives about the brain or whatever. I'm a little bit more comfortable
with just poetic BS about the brain as long as it helps engineer intelligence systems.
Well, I mean,
and I have to, you know, I confess ignorance when it comes to, you know, most things about coding
and I have some quantitative ability, but I don't have strong quantitative leanings. And so
I know my limitations too. And so I think the next generation coming up, you know, a lot of the
students at Stanford are really interested in quantitative models and theory and AI. And
I remember when I was coming up, a lot of the people who were doing work ahead of me, I kind of
rolled my eyes at some of the stuff they were doing, including some of their personalities,
although I have many great senior colleagues everywhere, the world. So it's the way of the
world. So nobody knows what it's like to be, you know, a young graduate student in 2020 except
the young graduate students. So I know what I do. I know there are a lot of things I don't know.
And in addition to why I do a lot of public education, increased scientific literacy and
neuroscientific thinking, etc. A big goal of mine is to try and at least pave the way so that
these really brilliant and forward thinking younger scientists can make the biggest possible
dent and make what will eventually be all us old guys and gals look stupid. I mean, that's
what we were all trying to do. That's what we were trying to do. So yeah. So from the highest
possible topic of consciousness to the, to the lowest level topic of David Goggins, let's go.
I don't know if it's low level. He's high performance. High performance. But like low,
like there's no, I don't think David has, has, has any time for philosophy. Let's just put it
this way. Well, it's, I mean, I think we can tack it to what we were just saying in a, in a
meaningful way, which is whatever goes on in that abstraction part of the brain, he's figured,
you know, he's figured out how to dig down in whatever the limbic friction. He's figured out
how to grab ahold of that, scruff it and send it in the direction that he's decided it needs to go.
And what's wild is that he's what we're talking about is him doing that to himself. Right? He's,
it's like he's scruffing himself and directing himself in a particular direction
and sending himself down that trajectory. And he, what's beautiful is that he acknowledges
that that process is not pretty. It doesn't feel good. It's kind of horrible at every level.
But he's created this rewarding element to it. And I think that's what's so, it's so admirable.
And it's what so many people crave, which is regulation of the self at that level.
And he practices, I mean, there's a ritual to it. There's every single day, like no exceptions.
There's a practice aspect to the suffering that he goes through.
It's principle suffering. Principle suffering. I mean, I just, I mean,
I admire all aspects of it, including him and his girlfriend slash wife. I'm not sure.
Should probably know this. I don't know. I'm not asking him.
No, no, we've only communicated, I've only communicated with her by text about some stuff
I was asking David. But yeah, they clearly have formed a powerful team.
Yeah. And it's a beautiful thing to see people working in that kind of synergy.
It's inspiring to me, same as with Elon, that a guy like David Goggins can find love.
That you find a thing that works, which gives me hope that like whatever,
whatever flavor of crazy I am, you can always find another thing that works with that.
But I've had the, so maybe let's trade Goggins stories, you're from a neuroscience
perspective, me from a self inflicted pain perspective. I somehow found myself
in communication with David about some challenges that I was undergoing.
One of which is we were communicating every single day, email phone about the particular
30 day challenge that I did and that stretched for longer of pushups and pullups.
You made a call out on social media. Yeah, social media.
Actually, I think that was the point. I knew of you before, but that's where I started tracking
some of what you were doing with these physical challenges. And I,
the hell is wrong with that guy? Well, no, I think I actually, I don't often comment on people's
stuff, but I think I commented something like neuroplasticity loves a non negotiable rule.
But no, I said a non negotiable contract because at the point where yeah, neuroplasticity really
loves a non negotiable contract because, you know, and I've said this before, so forgive me,
but you know, the brain is doing analysis of duration path and outcome. And that's a lot
of work for the brain. And the more that it can pass off duration path and outcome to just
reflex, the more energy and it can allocate to other things. So if you decide there's no
negotiation about how many pushups, how far I'm going to run, how many days, how many pullups,
et cetera, you actually have more energy for pushups running in pullups.
And when you say neuroplasticity, you mean like the brain wants the decision is made,
it'll start rewiring stuff to, to make sure that this we can actually make this happen.
That's right. I mean, so much of what we do is reflexive at the level of just core circuitry,
breathing, heart rate, all that boring stuff, digestion. But then there's a lot of reflexive
stuff like how you drink out of a mug of coffee, that's reflexive too, but that you had to learn
at some point in your life earlier when you were very little, analyzing duration path and outcome.
And that involves a lot of top down processing with the prefrontal cortex. But through plasticity
mechanisms, you now do it. So when you take on a challenge, provided that you understand the core
mechanics of how to, you know, run pushups and pullups and whatever else you decided to do.
Once you set the number and the duration and all that, then you all you have to do is just go.
But people get caught in that tide pool of just, well, do I really have to do it? How do I not do
that? What if I get injured? What if I, you know, can I sneak at this? So that, you know, and that's
work. And to some extent, I look, I not David Goggins, obviously, nor nor do I claim to understand
his process. Partially, you know, but maybe a little bit, which is that it's clear that by
making the decision, there's more resources to devote to the effort of the actual execution.
Well, that's a really, like what you're saying was not a lesson that was obvious to me. And it's
still not obvious. It's something I really work at, which is there is always an option to quit.
And I mean, that's something I really struggle with. I mean, I've quit some things in my life.
It's like stupid stuff. And one lesson I've learned is if you quit once, it opens the door
that like, it's really valuable to trick your brain into thinking
that you're going to have to die before you quit. Like, it's actually really convenient. So actually,
what you're saying is very profound, but you shouldn't intellectualize it. Like,
it took me time to develop, like out psychologically in ways that I think it would be
another conversation, because I'm not sure how to put it into words, but it's really tough
on me to do certain parts of that challenge.
Well, it's a huge output.
I thought it would be the number would be hard, but it's not. It's the entirety of it,
especially in the early days, was just spending, I'm kind of embarrassed to say how many hours
this took. So I didn't say publicly how many hours because people I knew people would be like,
don't you aren't you supposed to do other stuff? Well, it's how are you doing?
Again, I don't want to speculate too much about but occasionally, David has said this publicly
where people will be like, don't you sleep or something? And his process used to just be that
he would just block, delete, you know, like gone. But it's actually, it's a super interesting
topic. And because self control and directing our actions and the role of emotion and quitting,
these are vital to the human experience. And they're vital to performing well at anything.
And obviously at a super high level, being able to understand this about the self is crucial.
So I have a friend who was also in the teams. His name is Pat Dossett. He did nine years in the
SEAL teams. And in a similar way, there's a lore about him among team guys, because of a kind of
funny challenge he gave himself, which was so he and I swim together, although he swims further
up front than I do. And he's very patient. But, you know, he was on a he was assigned when he
was in the teams to a position that gave him a little more time behind a desk than he wanted.
And there's not as much time out in deployments, although he did deployments. So he didn't know
what to do at that time. But he thought about it and he asked himself, what does he hate the most?
And it turns out the thing that he hated doing the most was bear crawls, you know,
walking in your hands and knees. So he decided to bear crawl for a mile for time. So he was
bear crawling a mile a day, right? And I thought that was an interesting example that he gave,
because, you know, like, why pick the thing you hate the most? And I think it maps right back
to limbic friction. It's the thing that creates the most limbic friction. And so if you can overcome
that, then there's carryover. And I think the notion of carryover has been talked about psychologically
and kind of in the self help space, like, oh, if you run a marathon, it's going to help you in
other areas of life. But will it really? Will it? Well, I think it depends on whether or not
there's a lot of limbic friction. Because if there is, what you're exercising is not a circuit
for bear crawls, or a circuit for pull ups, what you're doing is you're exercising a circuit for
top down control. And that circuit was not designed to be for bear crawls, or pull ups, or coding,
or waking up in the middle of the night to do something hard. That circuit was designed to
override limbic friction. And so neural circuits were designed to generalize, right? The stress
response to an incoming threat that's a physical threat was designed to feel the same way and be
the same response internally as the threat to an impending exam, or divorce, or marriage, or whatever
it is that's stressing somebody out. And so neural circuits are not designed to be for one particular
action or purpose. So if you can, as you did, if you can train up top down control under conditions
of the highest limbic friction, that when the desired acquit is at its utmost, either because
of fatigue or hyperarousal, being too stressed or too tired, you're learning how to engage a
circuit. And that circuit is forever with you. And if you don't engage it, it sits there, but
it's atrophied. It's like a plant that doesn't get any water. And a lot of this has been discussed
in self help and growth mindset and all these kinds of ideas that circle the internet and social
media. But when you start to think about how they map to neural circuits, I think there's some
utility because what it means is that the limbic friction that you'll experience in, I don't know,
maybe some future relationship to something or someone, it's a category of neural processing
that should immediately click into place. It's just like the limbic friction you experienced
trying to engage in the God knows how many push ups, pull ups, and running runs you were doing.
25,000, 20,000. So folks, if Lex does this again, more comments, more likes.
This is the problem with you getting more followers as you're going to get more.
Actually, I should say that's the benefit. I don't know. Maybe it's not politically
correct for me to ask, but there is this stereotype about Russians being like being really
durable. And I started going to that Russian Banya way back before COVID and they could tolerate a
lot of heat and they would sit very stoic and no one was going, oh, it's hot in here. They were
just kind of like ease into it. So maybe there's something there who knows.
There might be something there, but it could be also just personal. I just have some,
I found myself, everyone's different, but I've found myself to be able to do
something unpleasant for very long periods of time. Like, I'm able to shut off the mind.
And I don't think that's been fully tested.
Monkey mind or the supercomputer?
Well, it's interesting. I mean, which mind tells you to quit exactly?
Limbic friction tells you.
Limbic friction is the source of that, but who are you talking with exactly?
So there's a, we can put something very concrete to that. So there's a paper published in Cell,
super top tier journal, two years ago, looking at effort. And this was in a visual environment
of trying to swim forward toward a target and a reward. And it was a really cool experiment
because they manipulated virtually the visual environment. So the same amount of effort was
being expended every time, but sometimes the perception was you're making forward progress
and sometimes the perception was you're making no progress because stuff wasn't drifting by,
meant no progress. So you can be swimming and swimming and not making progress.
And it turns out that with each bout of effort, there's a epinephrine and norepinephrine is being
released in the brainstem. And glia, what traditionally were thought of as support cells
for the neurons, but they do a lot of things actively too, are measuring the amount of
epinephrine and norepinephrine in that circuit. And when it exceeds a certain threshold,
the glia send inhibitory signals that shut down, top down control, they literally,
it's the quit, you stop, there's no more, it's you quit enduring. It can be rescued,
endurance can be rescued with dopamine. So that's where the subjective part really comes into play.
So you quit because you've learned how to turn that off or you've learned how to,
some people will reward the pain process so much that friction becomes the reward.
And when you talk about people like Goggins and other people I know from special operations and
people have gone through cancer treatments three times, you hear about, just when you hear about
people, the Victor Frankel stories, I mean, you hear about Nelson Mandela, you hear about these
stories, I'm sure the same process is involved. Again, this speaks to the generalizability of
these processes as opposed to a neural circuit for a particular action or cognitive function.
So I think you have to learn to subjectively self reward in a way that replenishes you.
Goggins talks about eating souls. It's a very dramatic example. In his mind, apparently,
that's a form of reward, but it's not just a form of reward where it's like you're picking up a
trophy or something. It's actually it gives the energy. It's a reward that gives more neural energy
and I'm defining that as more dopamine to suppress the noradrenaline and adrenaline circuits in the
brainstem. So ultimately maps of that. Yeah, he creates enemies. He's always fighting enemies.
I never, I think I have enemies, but they're usually just versions of me inside my head.
So I thought about through that 30 day challenge, I tried to come up with like
fake enemies. It wasn't working. The only enemy I came up with is David.
Well, now you certainly have a formidable adversary in this one. I don't care. David,
I'm willing to die on this one. So let's go there. Well, let's hope you both survive this.
Well, my problem is the physical. So everything we've been talking about has been in the mind.
There's a physical aspect that's just practically difficult, which is when you injure yourself
at a certain point, you just can't function. Or you're doing more damage talking about it,
taking yourself out of running for the rest of your life potentially or for years. So
you know, I'd love to avoid that, right? There's just like stupid physical stuff that you just
want to avoid. You want to keep it purely in the mental. And if it's purely in the mental,
that's when the race is interesting. But yeah, the problem with these physical challenges,
as David has experienced, I mean, it has a toll on your body. I tend to think of the mind as
limitless and the body is kind of unfortunately quite limited. Well, I think the key is to
dynamically control your output. And that can be done by reducing effort, which doesn't work throughout,
but also by restoring through these subjective reward processes. And we don't want to go down
the rabbit hole of why this all works. But these are ancient pathways that were designed to
bring resources to an animal or to a person through foraging for hunting or mates or water or
all these things. And they work so well because they're down in those circuits where we know
the zeros and ones. And that's great because it can be subjective at the level of, oh, I reached
this one milestone, this one horizon, this one three meter target. But if you don't reward it,
it's just effort. If you do self reward it, it's effort minus one in terms of the adrenaline output.
But I have to ask you about this. You're one of the great communicators in science. I'm
really a big fan of yours enjoying in terms of like the educational stuff you're putting
on neuroscience. Thank you. What's the, do you have a philosophy behind it or is it just an
instinct? Oh my unstoppable force. Do you have like, what's your thinking? Because it's rare
and it's exciting. I'm excited that somebody from Stanford, so I, okay, I'm in multiple places in
the sense of like where my interests lie. And politically speaking, academic institutions
are under fire for many reasons we don't need to get into. I get into it in a lot of other places.
But I believe in places like Stanford and places like MIT as one of the most magical
institutions for inspiring people to dream, people to build the future. I mean, I believe
that it is a really special, these universities are really special places. And so it's always
exciting to me when somebody as inspiring as you represents those places. So it makes me
proud that somebody from Stanford is like something like you is representing Stanford.
So maybe you could speak to what's, how did you come to be who you are in being a communicator?
Well, first of all, thanks for the kind words, especially coming from you. I think
Stanford is an amazing place as is MIT. And it's such a... MIT is better by the way.
I'll let it out anything you say at this point. I've got many friends at MIT.
Smarter friends, yeah. Ed Boyden is among the best in class. There's some people,
not me, that can hold a candle to him, but not many, maybe one or two. I think the
great benefit of being in a place like MIT or Stanford is that when you look around,
the average is very high. You have many best in class among the one or two or three best in
the world at what they do. And it's a wonderful privilege to be there. And one thing that I
think also makes them and other universities like them very special is that there's an emphasis on
what gets exported out of the university, not keeping it ivory tower and really trying to keep
an eye on what's needed in the world and trying to do something useful. And I think the proximity
to industry and Silicon Valley and in the Boston area in Cambridge also lends itself well to that.
And there are other institutions too, of course. So the reason I got involved in educating on
social media was actually because of Pat Dossett, the mile bear call guy. I was at the turn of
2018 to 2019. We had formed a good friendship and he talked to me into doing these early morning
cold water swims. I was learning a lot about pain and suffering, but also the beauty of cold water
swims. And we were talking one morning, he said, so what are you going to do to serve the world
in 2019? That's the way that a Texan former seal talks. We're just literally like, what are you
going to do to serve the world in 2019? Well, I run my lab, it's like, no, no, no, what are you
going to do that's new? And he wasn't forceful in it, but I was like, that's interesting question.
I said, well, if I had my way, I would just teach people, everyone about the brain because I think
it's amazing. He goes, we'll do it. All right. He goes, shake on it. So we did it. And so I
started putting out these posts and it's grown into to include a variety of things. But you asked
about a governing philosophy. So I want to increase interest in the brain and in the nervous system
and in biology generally. That's one major goal. I'd like to increase scientific literacy, which
can't be rammed down people's throats of talking about how to look at a graph and statistics and
z scores and p values and genetics. It has to be done gradually in my opinion. I want to put
valuable tools into the world, mainly tools that map to things that we're doing in our lab.
So these will be tools centered around how to understand and direct one's states of mind and
body. So reduce stress, raise one's stress threshold. So it's not always just about being
calm. Sometimes it's about learning how to tolerate not being not calm,
raise awareness for mental health. There's a ton of micro missions in this. But it all really maps
back to the eight and 10 year old version of me, which is I used to spend my weekends when I was
a kid reading about weird animals. And I had this obsession with medieval weapons and stuff like
catapults. And then I used to come into school on Monday and I would ask if I could talk about it
to the class and teach. And I promise and some people might not believe me, but I don't really
like being the point of focus. I just get so excited about these gems that I find in the
world in books and in experiments and in discussions with colleagues and discussions with people like
you and around the universe. And just compulsively, I got to tell people about it. So I try and package
it into a form that people can access. I think the reception has been really wonderful. Stanford
has been very supportive, thankfully. I've done some podcasts even with them and they've reposted
some stuff on social media. It's a precarious place to put yourself out there as a research
academic. I think some of my colleagues, both locally and elsewhere, probably wonder if I'm
still serious about research, which I absolutely am. And I also acknowledge that their research and
the research coming out of the field needs to be talked about. And not all scientists are good at
translating that into a language that people can access. And I don't like the phrase dumb it down.
What I like to do is take a concept that I think people will find interesting and useful
and offer it sort of like you would offer food to somebody visiting your home. You're not going
to cram Fragras in their face. You're going to say, do you want a cracker? And they say, yeah,
do you want something on that cracker? Do you like cheese? Yeah, do you want Swiss cheese or
you want that really stinky French cheese? I don't like cheese much. But do you want
Fragras? What's that? So the best information prompts more questions of interest, not questions
of confusion, but questions of interest. And so I feel like one door opens, then another door opens,
then another door opens. And pretty soon, the image in my mind is you create a bunch of neuroscientists
who are thinking about themselves neuroscientifically. And I don't begin to think that I have all the
answers at all. I cast a neuroscience, sometimes a little bit of a psychology lens onto what I
think are interesting topics. And someday I'm going to go into the ground or the ocean or
wherever it is I end up. And I'm very comfortable with the fact that not everyone's going to be
happy with how I deliver the information. But I would hope that people would feel like some of
it was useful and meaningful and got them to think a little bit harder. Since you mentioned going
into the ground and Victor Franco man search for meaning, I reread that book quite often. Let me
ask the the big ridiculous question about life. What do you think is the the meaning of it all?
Like maybe why do you do you mention that book from a psychologist's perspective,
which Victor Franco was? Do you ever think about the the bigger philosophical questions
that raises about meaning? What's and the meaning of it all?
One of the great challenges in assigning a good, you know, giving a good answer to the question
of like, what's the meaning of life is, I think illustrated best by the Victor Franco example,
although there are other examples too, which is that our sense of meaning is very elastic
in time and space. And we talked a little bit about this earlier, but it's amazing to me that
somebody locked in a cell or a concentration camp can bring the horizon in close enough
that they can then micro slice their environment so that they can find rewards and meaning and power
and beauty even in a little square box or or a horrible situation. And I think this is really
speaks to one of the most important features of the human mind, which is we could do let's take two
opposite extremes. One would be, let's say the alarm went off right now in this building and the
building started shaking. Our vision, our hearing, everything would be tuned to this space time bubble
for those moments. And everything that we would process, all that would matter, the only meaning
would be get out of here safe, figure out what's going on, contact loved ones, etc. If we were
to sit back totally relaxed, we could do the, you know, as I think it's called pale blue dot thing
or whatever, where we could imagine ourselves in this room, and then they were in the United
States and this continent and the earth and then it's peering down us. And all of a sudden you
get back, it can seem so big that all of a sudden it's meaningless, right? If you see yourself as
just one brief glimmer in all of time and all of space, you go to, I don't matter. And if you go to,
oh, every little thing that happens in this text thread or this, you know, comment section on
YouTube or Instagram, your space time bubble is tiny, then everything seems inflated and the brain
will contract and dilate its space time, vision and time, but also sense of meaning. And that's
beautiful. And it's what allows us to be so dynamic in different environments and we can pull from
the past and the present and future. It's why examples like Nelson Mandela and Victor Frankel
had to include. It makes sense that it wasn't just about grinding it out, they had to find
those dopamine rewards even in those little boxes they were forced into. So I'm not trying to dodge
an answer, but for me personally, and I think about this a lot, because I have this complicated
history in science where my undergraduate graduate advisor and postdoctoral advisor all died young.
So, you know, and they were wonderful people and had immense importance in my life. But what I
realized is that we can get so fixated on the thing that we're experiencing holding tremendous
meaning, but it only holds that meaning for as long as we're in that space time regime. And this
is important because what really gives meaning is the understanding that you can move between
these different space time dimensionalities. And I'm not trying to sound like a theoretical
physicist or anyone that thinks about the cosmos and saying that. It's really the fact that sometimes
we say and do and think things and it feels so important. And then two days later, we're like,
what happened? Well, you had a different brain processing algorithm entirely, you were in a
completely different state. And so what I want to do in this lifetime is I want to engage in as
many different levels of contraction and dilation of meaning as possible. I want to go to the micro.
I sometimes think about this. I'm like, if I just pulled over the side of the road, I bet you
there's an ant hill there and their whole world is fascinating. You can't stay there. And you also
can't stay staring up at the clouds and just think about how we're just these little beings and it
doesn't matter. The key is the journey back and forth up and down that staircase back and forth
and back and forth. And my goal is to get as many trips up and down that staircase as I can before
the Reaper comes for me. Oh, beautiful. So the dance of dilation and contraction between the
difference, zoom in, zoom out, and get as many steps in on that staircase. That's my goal anyway.
And I've watched people die. I watched my postdoc advisor die with or away. It was tragic, but
they found beauty in these closing moments because their bubble was their kids in one case or
like one of them was a Giants fan and got to see a Giants game in her last moments.
And you just realize it's a Giants game, but not in that moment because time is closing and so
those time bins feel huge because she's slicing things so differently. So I think learning how
to do that better and more fluidly, recognizing where one is and not getting too tacked to the
idea that there's one correct answer, like that's what brings meaning. That's my goal anyway.
I don't think there's a better way to end it. Andrew, I really appreciate that you would come
down and contract your space time and focus on this conversation for a few hours. It is
a huge honor. I'm a huge fan of yours as I told you. I hope you keep growing and educating the world
about the human mind. Thanks for talking today. Thank you. I really appreciate the invitation
to be here. And people might think that I'm saying it just because I'm here, but I'm a huge fan of
yours. I send your podcasts to my colleagues and other people. And I think what you're doing isn't
just amazing. It's important. And so thank you. Thanks for listening to this conversation with
Andrew Huberman. And thank you to our sponsors. ASleep, a mattress that cools itself and gives
me yet another reason to enjoy sleep. SEMrush, the most advanced SEO optimization tool I've ever
come across. And Cash App, the app I use to send money to friends. Please check out these sponsors
in the description to get a discount and to support this podcast. If you enjoy this thing,
subscribe on YouTube, review it with five stars on Apple podcast, follow on Spotify, support on
Patreon, or connect with me on Twitter, Alex Friedman. And now let me leave you with some words
from Carl Jung. I am not what happened to me. I am what I choose to become. Thank you for listening
and hope to see you next time.